TITLE:Founder-CEO Compensation and Selection into Venture Capital-Backed Entrepreneurship
Abstract:  We show theoretically that a critical determinant of the attractiveness of venture capital (VC)-backed entrepreneurship for high-earning potential founders is the expected time to develop a startup's initial product. This is because founder-CEOs' cash compensation increases substantially after product development, alleviating the nondiversifiable risk that founders face at startup birth. Consistent with the model's predictions of where the supply of entrepreneurial talent is likely to be most constrained, we find that technological shocks differentially altering the expected time to product across industries can explain changes in both the rate of entry and characteristics of individuals selecting into VC-backed entrepreneurship.
introduction:   Venture capital (VC)-backed startups playa critical role in the economy due to their disproportionate contribution to corporate R&D and innovation (Kortum and Lerner (2000), Lerner and Nanda (2020)). While a growing literature studies frictions in the provision of VC financing to startups seeking risk capital, few papers investigate potential constraints to the supply of entrepreneurial talent to VC-backed startups, in particular, to the drivers of selection into VC-backed entrepreneurship.
  Understanding selection into VC-backed entrepreneurship is critical to understanding startup innovation because, as Rajan (2012) notes, the differentiation needed to create a new enterprise also requires that an entrepreneur hold significant control rights over its direction. This requirement implies that an entrepreneur cannot be decoupled from the startup at its birth. Given the systematic association between an individual's background or experiences and entrepreneurial ideas (Gompers, Lerner, and Scharfstein (2005), Koning, Samila, and Ferguson (2021)), the set of individuals who find it feasible to select into entrepreneurship has clear implications for the types of innovations commercialized by startup ventures.
  A potential barrier to the supply of entrepreneurial talent stems from the compensation contract between investors and entrepreneurs at firm birth (Hall and Woodward (2010), Rajan (2012)). Since this contract comprises low cash compensation to screen entrepreneurs, it can also leave entrepreneurs, especially those with attractive outside options, holding substantial nondiversifiable risk at founding. Yet, as Rajan (2012) discusses, startups undergo a transformation during their life cycle such that soft assets such as founder human capital decline in importance, enabling a “standardization” that facilitates financing from arms-length investors. If founder-CEOs' compensation changes after this transformation, understanding when this transformation occurs in a startup's life cycle is critical, as it can have important implications for the degree of nondiversifiable risk held by entrepreneurs. In turn, this can impact the degree to which the supply of entrepreneurial talent is constrained.
  This paper combines several novel data sources with a dynamic model of selection into entrepreneurship to study the length of time that founder-CEOs hold nondiversifiable risk and the implications this has for the supply of entrepreneurial talent to VC-backed startups. We pinpoint the development of a startup's first product as the key milestone after which CEOs receive substantial increases in cash compensation, consistent with a shift in liquid pay over the “differentiation” to “standardization” transformation modeled by Rajan (2012). Indeed, we show theoretically that increases in CEOs' cash compensation after a startup begins product development are large enough that nondiversifiable risk held by founder-CEOs falls substantially after achieving the product development milestone. In turn, this implies that a startup's expected time to develop its first product is a key determinant of the attractiveness of VC-backed entrepreneurship. Our empirical analysis provides strong support for the theoretical predictions. Moreover, we offer initial evidence on particular sectors in which the supply of entrepreneurial talent is most likely to be constrained and hence innovation is most likely to be missing.
  Our analysis proceeds in three steps. We first use proprietary data on CEO compensation for a representative sample of U.S. VC-backed startups to study how founder-CEO compensation evolves across a startup's life cycle. As might be expected for a typical entrepreneur compensation contract, cash compensation for founder-CEOs in the very early stages consists of a low salary with no bonus. However, developing a first product is an important milestone associated with a clear shift in CEO cash compensation. Base salary increases markedly after this milestone, with the structure of cash compensation appearing to become more consistent with compensation contracts for managers in the literature on CEO compensation in publicly traded firms (Edmans, Gabaix, and Jenter (2017)). The product development milestone is also the point at which the hazard of founder-CEO replacement increases—after product development, the firm and the entrepreneur can be decoupled from each other.
  An important aspect of our findings is that this shift from an entrepreneur to a manager cash compensation contract is also present for founder-CEOs who remain with the venture. To the extent that the increase in cash compensation post-product can insure an entrepreneur against nondiversifiable risk, the expected time to product development can have important implications for the attractiveness of selecting into entrepreneurship. In the second step of our analysis, we quantitatively assess the attractiveness of entrepreneurial entry as a function of the expected time to product development. To do so, we use a dynamic consumption-savings model in which founder-CEO cash compensation responds to product development milestones, as estimated from the data on startup CEO compensation. We find that while a post-product increase in cash compensation makes founding a startup more attractive than a contract that pays a flat salary, low pre-product compensation can still leave high-earning potential founders holding substantial nondiversifiable risk. This result implies that variation in the expected time to product development is a key driver of the relative attractiveness of entrepreneurship across sectors for potential founders with attractive options outside of entrepreneurship and insufficient personal wealth to finance consumption while waiting for a product to materialize.1
  Our model predicts that industries in which the product milestone is expected to be achieved more quickly, and hence uncertainty resolved faster, are those industries in which entrepreneurship is ex ante significantly more attractive. Conversely, all else equal, a missing supply of entrepreneurs is more likely in industries with high expected time to product development and slow resolution of uncertainty, which leaves entrepreneurs bearing the burden of nondiversifiable risk.
  To illustrate the quantitative importance of the model-implied differences in founding attractiveness, we use the introduction of cloud computing as a shock to product development times. This 2006 shock disproportionately affected software and Internet startups. A parametric model of the joint distribution of income and wealth shows that founding becomes attractive for many more high-earning individuals. Prior to the advent of cloud computing, our model suggests that nondiversifiable risk potentially deterred 14% of individuals in the top 2% of the earnings distribution in the United States (i.e., with pretax earnings above $225,000) from founding a VC-backed startup. The introduction of cloud computing—which reduced the share of three-year-old firms that had yet to have a product by 15%—made founding attractive for an additional 61,000 individuals with earnings over $225,000. This increase represents about 13% of the pre-cloud-era individuals deterred from entering by nondiversifiable risk and about 2% of the total population earning more than $225,000. To put these numbers into perspective, approximately 1,100 VC-funded startups were founded across all industries each year over the early years of cloud computing (2001 to 2006). Of course, not all of these potential founders will have a business or product idea or the motivation to start a company. Nonetheless, our analysis suggests that differential changes in the expected time to product across industries impacts the composition of industries' high-earning entrants.
  In the final part of the analysis, we test the model's predictions using LinkedIn data on the career histories of entrepreneurs whose startups received VC financing. A novel aspect of this analysis is our use of pre-founding job titles and industries to match with occupation and industry codes in the Census Bureau's American Community Survey (ACS), which has information on earnings for a representative sample of the U.S. population. This allows us to examine how the pre-entry earnings of VC-backed entrepreneurs vary based on whether they founded their venture in industries with longer or shorter expected time to product.
  To overcome concerns about systematic differences in skill requirements or founders' motivations across sectors, we exploit the cloud computing technology shock in difference-in-differences regressions. The number of founders that we estimate to have earned more than $225,000 prior to founding increases by over 60% in Internet, software, and related entries after the advent of cloud computing. This greater entry into VC-backed entrepreneurship from the top of the earnings distribution was observed only in industries where the time to product fell after the diffusion of cloud computing. There was little change in the composition (or rate) of entrants in industries where the time to product did not change. These results provide strong empirical evidence consistent with shorter expected time to product development playing a critical role in relaxing entrepreneurial entry constraints for the highest earning individuals in the workforce, with implications for the supply of new ideas in these industries.
  Our findings relate to several strands of literature. First, our paper contributes to the literature on principal-agent problems, both between investors and entrepreneurs and between shareholders and CEOs. On the one hand, this work highlights the importance of contracts that provide minimal cash compensation to help screen entrepreneurs under asymmetric information (Aghion and Bolton (1992)). On the other hand, it highlights the importance of dynamic contracts where performance is rewarded with intermediate cash liquidity (Edmans et al. (2012)). Our work shows that the transition from one type of contract to another occurs relatively early in the life of VC-backed startups, and consistent with Rajan's (2012) theoretical model of the life cycle of firms, is tied to the process of standardization when the founder and the firm can be decoupled from each other.
  Our paper is also related to the literature on selection into entrepreneurship. Past work documents the role of paid employment as a source of ideas and training for potential entrepreneurs and the conditions leading them to select into entrepreneurship (Bhidé (2003), Gompers, Lerner, and Scharfstein (2005), Babina, Ouimet, and Zarutskie (2017), Kim (2018)). Theoretical work examines financial trade-offs between entrepreneurship and paid employment (Anton and Yao (1995), Hellmann (2007)), as well as potential frictions associated with the entry decision in terms of nondiversifiable risk (Hall and Woodward (2010)). We show that for VC-backed startups, expected time to product development (rather than expected time to exit) is likely the core driver of the degree of nondiversifiable risk faced by entrepreneurs. This observation is consistent with the idea that entrepreneurial selection is an experimentation process, where the speed with which milestones are achieved, and hence uncertainty is resolved, impacts the risk that entrepreneurs face (Kerr, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf (2014), Manso (2016), Dillon and Stanton (2017)).
  Finally, our results highlight an underappreciated role played by VC investors, namely, intermediate liquidity providers, which they may be uniquely positioned to do as hands-on investors able to resolve information asymmetry more effectively than passive capital providers. This liquidity provider role may also help explain the sectors in which VCs are more actively involved in financing innovation. The faster resolution of uncertainty for firms in certain sectors (Ewens, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf (2018)) implies a lower need for VCs to provide up-front inducements to founders. Sectors in which uncertainty is resolved more slowly likely exhibit the highest burden of nondiversifiable risk. The degree to which these individuals' ideas are not commercialized (or commercialized inside incumbent firms) as well as the aggregate impact of this selection remains an interesting area of further work.

I. Startup's First Product as a Key Inflection Point:   This section documents results from the first step of our three-step analysis. We show that transitioning to product development is an important milestone for a startup, marking the point at which founders can be decoupled from their entrepreneurial ventures. The hazard of founder replacement increases substantially after a firm makes this transition. Moreover, all CEOs, including founder-CEOs who remain with the firm, observe substantial increases in liquid cash compensation after this milestone, suggesting a shift from an entrepreneur contract to a manager contract for the founder-CEO once a firm begins product development. We first document results for CEO compensation. We then consider founder-CEO replacement.
  Our core compensation data set comes from two cross sections of compensation surveys from AHR, a leading data provider covering private startups. Startups become eligible for survey inclusion by AHR if they received capital from a VC investor that participates in the survey. Participating investors range from very early-stage seed funds to later-stage funds. Nearly all of the most prominent and well-known VC funds are included. Based on data from VentureSource, a commercial data provider that contains information on the near-population of VC-backed startups, participating funds in the AHR survey managed 42% of total industry assets and deployed nearly 49% of the dollar-weighted investments during the survey years.2
  Survey completion occurs after a participating VC fund solicits portfolio company responses. Responses by startup portfolio companies are strongly encouraged by the investors, who are typically members of the startup's board. Both VCs and startups obtain access to benchmarking data in exchange for responses. We are aware of no other compensation data for startups that offer similar coverage in our sample period or on the scale that AHR provides.
  Each survey wave contains individual-level information on salary, bonus, fully diluted equity, and whether the CEO is a founder. The individual-level records also include a number of categorical startup-level characteristics, such as revenue, total employment, cumulative venture financing raised, and product-related milestones. To protect confidentiality, our data and that shared with VC investors are anonymous. The data cannot be linked to individuals or startups, and startups cannot be linked over time. However, because we know the identities of the VC firms that participate in the AHR survey, we use the VentureSource data to estimate the implied response rate among their portfolio companies. We also detail potential differences between respondents and startups that were eligible to take the survey. We discuss these analyses in the next section on survey data validation.
  We have access to data from AHR's 2015 and 2017 survey waves for technology companies (which does not include data on biotech and healthcare startups). The 2015 survey contains data from 933 portfolio companies that received funding from 70 VC investors; the 2017 survey has data on 1,552 portfolio companies associated with 115 VC investors.3Our core AHR sample focuses on U.S.-based CEOs in startups founded after 1996.4
  We use three additional sources to verify the robustness of our compensation: data from Compensation Pro, which conducted a survey of VC-backed startups from 2008 to 2010; S-1 filings of startups that go public, to study the cash compensation of founder-CEOs of newly public firms; and data on the compensation of publicly traded firms' CEOs using Execucomp. None of these data sources has representative coverage of early-stage firms, so we cannot use them for inference on compensation dynamics over a firm's life cycle. However, these data allow us to show that the compensation patterns that we document in the AHR data for mature, post-product firms are similar to those from prior periods, across different industries, including startups in the biotech, consumer products, and industrial/energy sectors. This result provides reassurance that the relatively high post-product cash compensation that we see in the more detailed AHR data is not being driven by the particular period studied in our analysis.
  Although the survey data are anonymous, we know the identities of the participating VCs, which enables us to validate the AHR surveys with comparisons to the universe of startups active during the survey years, as measured by VentureSource. Based on startups in the VentureSource universe with at least one VC investor that participates in the survey, we calculate that the AHR data cover 58% of the VentureSource firms backed by eligible VCs, which indicates a strong response rate among startups eligible for survey inclusion.
  The AHR data cover 25% of all VentureSource firms under 10 years old in the industries it covers, which is consistent with a response rate of approximately 60% among eligible startups, and the VCs that are part of AHR account for approximately 40% to 45% of all VC investments in the United States. Among firms with investments from participating VCs, the AHR sample appears to be representative based on total investment amounts and the firm age distribution. We find that the AHR data appear to have a somewhat higher response rate from firms that raised more than the median level of capital, so in later analyses we reweight the AHR survey data to reflect the joint distribution of firm age and capital raised in the VentureSource universe; the results are very similar to those for the unweighted specifications. SectionIA.A1of theInternet Appendixprovides details about how we compare the samples and the calculations we conduct, and reports tables that display additional moments for comparison.
  TableIdisplays descriptive statistics for founder-CEOs in the AHR data. The data are presented in two panels based on variables that capture financing information and performance milestones. The first panel splits by funding round, capturing the number of rounds of outside investment the firm raised. The next panel presents data broken down by firms' revenue and product status. Both panels are sorted from earlier to later stages for each variable, which correlates with increasing average firm age across rows. Note that this progression is not deterministic because there is variation in firm age in each category. This variation allows us to separate age effects from other milestones or events that influence compensation over the startup life cycle.
  Average CEO cash compensation increases with the company stage, with the largest percent increase in compensation occurring between “pre-product” and “post-product” firms. Pre-product firms are those that report “Early/Product Definition” as their development stage. Post-product firms report “Product Development,” “Product in Beta,” “Shipping Product,” or “Profitable” as their product development stage. All firms with strictly positive revenue are “Post-product” firms, although it is possible to be categorized as Post-product but Pre-revenue. Panel B shows a dramatic difference in compensation between post-product firms that have yet to realize any revenue and pre-product firms. Founder-CEOs of pre-product firms earn $85,000 per year in cash, whereas CEOs of post-product, pre-revenue firms average $165,000 in annual cash compensation.
  Progressing through the rows in each panel of TableI, CEO compensation rises with each stage or milestone. The CEOs of mature firms (Post-Series B, with greater than $10 million in revenue) earn, on average, over $240,000 per year in cash compensation. The standard deviation of total cash compensation also increases across rows in each panel.5The last column of the table shows that CEOs hold less than 40% of the as-if-converted equity by the first financing round.6Founder equity stakes decline as firms mature due to the dilution that comes with raising capital. Our analysis of the attractiveness of founding accounts for the increasing profile of pay and firm value with respect to milestones and founders' declining equity shares that comes from dilution.
  Graphical evidence clearly displays the importance of having a product as a precondition for increases in founder-CEO compensation. The top left panel of Figure1displays average cash compensation and the interquartile range by firm age.7The figure shows a substantial increase in founder-CEO cash compensation as firm's age. The remaining panels in Figure1help disentangle the mechanisms. The top right panel conditions on pre-product firms that have no revenue and have not yet achieved viable product definition. Across the firm age distribution, average cash compensation is below $100,000 for pre-product firms. Founder-CEOs of pre-product firms do not have an increasing compensation profile with firm age. Founder-CEOs of four-year-old pre-product firms earn no more than one-year-old pre-product firms. Note that the distribution of pre-product firms is not truncated at four years of age—instead, firms that do not have a product rarely survive to their fifth year. This pattern suggests that the overall increase in compensation with firm age stems from the increasing number of surviving firms that achieved product market milestones and the death of firms that failed to achieve product traction.
  The bottom two panels plot similar figures, but instead of focusing on firm age, thex-axis corresponds to capital raised. Capital is related to firm milestones, but conditional on capital raised, pre-product firms in the bottom right panel have lower average pay and a more compressed interquartile range of pay than the unconditional plots. Both of these splits, by firm age and capital raised, suggest that having a viable product is a significant inflection point for CEO compensation. We next turn to multivariate regressions, which demonstrate that the insights continue to hold when we account for other factors that may vary with product status. Robustness tests below further show that our results are not due to unobserved selection.
  TheX$X$matrix contains indicators for milestones, such as achieving product status or raising capital, that may be realized over the firm life cycle. The first column of TableIIcontains our baseline model with the fewest controls. Cash compensation is positively related to firm revenue, with substantial increases in compensation among firms that have positive revenue relative to the baseline category of pre-revenue firms. Column (2) adds firm age. After controlling for age, revenue between $0 and $10 million annually is associated with an approximately 49% increase in pay (exp(0.401)−1$\exp (0.401)-1$) relative to pre-revenue firms. Compensation continues to increase with revenue until firms hit more than $100 million in annual revenue.
  Column (3) tests for the importance of having a product for compensation, with striking results. This column includes the post-product dummy indicating whether the firm made it beyond the pre-product stage, as described in TableIand Figure1. This separates the degree to which revenue and customer traction drives founder-CEO cash compensation, versus intellectual property or technology. Even if the product is not yet sold, its existence may signal that the enterprise is on the path from differentiation to standardization, that the CEO is becoming a manager rather than an innovator or idea generator, and that the firm is becoming separable from the founder (Rajan (2012)). Having a product, rather than earning revenue or having paying customers, is the significant inflection point for compensation. Between column (2), which does not have the post-product dummy, and column (3), which does, the coefficient on having between $0 and $10 million in revenue falls from 0.40 to−0.05$-0.05$. The 0.62 coefficient on the post-product dummy explains why. The compensation-revenue gradient remains positive for firms with over $10 million in sales, but is far less pronounced relative to column (2). The product definition dummy, revenue dummies, and firm age together explain 48% of the variance in cash compensation. Subsequent columns add additional characteristics, as noted in the bottom of the table. The 0.365 coefficient after controlling for cumulative VC investment, total rounds of funding, industry, region, and firm age implies that having a tangible product is associated with an increase in cash compensation of approximatelyexp(0.365)−1=44%$\exp (0.365)-1 = 44\%$. Together, these additional controls raise theR2$R^{2}$to 0.53, while product definition remains economically significant. Region fixed effects are jointly insignificant in a Wald test in column (5). Thus, considering firm-, industry- and region-level factors, the majority of the variation in pay is driven by variation in underlyingfirmfundamentals, swamping the geographic and industry differences shown to be important in other contexts (Moretti (2010)).
  Column (6) turns to whether the results from the survey data generalize to the universe of startup firms by reweighting the AHR sample to match the cross section of VentureSource in each survey year. We target firm age and capital raised in this reweighting exercise, as these dimensions capture potential sampling bias over the firm age distribution or a bias toward better-capitalized firms in the AHR survey. The main results remain similar to those without the reweighting.
  In Figure2, we display the predicted densities of the level of cash compensation. We take the fitted values from column (5) of TableIIand show how the distribution changes for firms with different product statuses and revenue levels. Pre-product firms have a narrow density of pay, with a low mean. Post-product but pre-revenue firms have a distribution that is shifted to the right. The pay distribution continues to shift rightward as firms increase revenue.
  In this section, we document results of several tests to show the robustness of the finding that liquid cash compensation increases substantially after developing an initial product.
  We first examine the robustness of our estimates to unobserved firm or founder quality, and conclude that unobservables would need to be implausibly large to explain the increasing cash compensation that comes with having a product. Note that since survey waves cannot be linked over time, we do not observe the evolution of CEO compensation within a given firm. Instead, we exploit differences in the evolution of firms across their life cycles in the cross section of our surveys, tracing out the evolution of compensation based on firms observed at different points in their life cycles. One might therefore be concerned that our estimates are contaminated by survival bias. For example, if only the highest-quality firms from the pre-product distribution are observed among the post-product set, then the differences in compensation that we observe across firm age could be due to the survival of firms associated with higher pre-product CEO salaries and the failure of firms with lower pre-product CEO salaries.
  To assess how extreme such selection would need to be to change our conclusions, we conduct a bounding exercise in the spirit of Lee (2009). The idea behind this exercise is to “back out” how extreme selection would need to be for it to be the primary driver of a set of results. The exercise assumes that sample selection is monotone, in that firms with higher pre-product CEO compensation are more likely to be observed in subsequent rounds, which is likely to be the nature of selection in our setting. In this case, one can compare the conditional mean for the top X% of the distribution of pre-product firms' compensation with the distribution of post-product compensation, where X is the share of firms that survive. In other words, suppose only the top X% of firms in a given round survived to the next round. One can compare the distribution of compensation for the top X% of firms in the prior round to the distribution of compensation in the focal round. If the distribution of salaries is still right-shifted when one assumes such extreme selection, then selection cannot account for all of the effect being measured. SectionIA.A2of theInternet Appendixprovides more details about the procedure. Against the trimmed distribution that assumes surviving firms started as the most highly compensated among pre-product firms, we find an increase in log total compensation of 0.35 (a 42% increase in levels) due to having a tangible product (the standard error is 0.05). The mean (and median) of the post-product total compensation distribution are equivalent to the 91stpercentile of the pre-product total compensation distribution. Given these extreme differences, selection on unobserved quality is unlikely to explain the importance of product milestones for CEO compensation in the cross section of firms.
  We next examine whether the founder-CEO compensation that we document for post-product firms holds across eras and industries. To examine the robustness of high CEO-compensation over time, we employ two sources of data on publicly traded companies, as shown in Figure3. Panel A uses hand-collected data on corporate filings of new IPOs among VC-backed startups over the 2006 to 2018 period to provide evidence on the total cash compensation of founder-CEOs for these newly public firms.8Every firm filing an S-1 for an IPO must provide three years of compensation history for the CEO and other top executives. Using these recorded filings, we examine cash compensation in 2015 dollars for firms that IPO over the time series and whose CEOs are still the founders.9Among firms that eventually go public, median compensation for founder-CEOs ranges between $290,000 and $400,000, consistent with the total compensation figures presented in TableI. Compensation is at the higher end of this range for the latter years of the sample, consistent with firms taking longer to go public and therefore being somewhat larger. In Panel B of Figure3, we draw on data from Execucomp and scraped proxy filings to provide bin-scatterplots of the relationship between CEOs' compensation and the revenue of the firms they run. Consistent with the literature on CEO compensation, the panel shows that log CEO compensation scales linearly with the log of firm revenue for publicly traded firms. Two other features are worth noting. First, the slope of the relationship between CEO compensation and firm revenue is similar for both public companies and those in AHR, suggesting that the manager contract emerges early in the life of ventures once they provide a product. Second, there is overlap between the compensation levels of the larger firms in AHR and the smaller publicly traded firms. Taken together, these patterns provide reassurance that the AHR data are capturing systematic moments of the late-stage, post-product compensation contract rather than either a shift over time or a blip driven by high inflows of capital into the VC sector during a low interest rate environment.
  An additional data set from Compensation Pro (formerly provided by Dow Jones), covering 2008 to 2010, provides suggestive evidence that our post-product compensation moments for tech firms extend to other industries, including industries that are not available in our AHR data. Bengtsson and Hand (2011) use these data to shed light on how compensation changes with fundraising events, and they provide evidence of funding milestones that increase compensation. Unfortunately, these data are not well suited to capture pre-product firms and the inflection point around the product transition. As we discuss in the note toInternet AppendixTableIA.III, the share of pre-product startups in the Compensation Pro data is 2.5%, whereas 54% of VentureSource startups alive between 2008 and 2010 are classified as pre-product. A lack of representativeness among early-stage firms means that we use the data to assess the similarity of compensation forpost-productfirms from this era.
  The post-product compensation moments we observe in the AHR data for tech companies in 2015 and 2017 appear similar to the compensation moments for post-product tech companies and nontech companies (which are not observed in AHR) in the 2008 to 2010 Compensation Pro data. TableIA.IIIdisplays the means and medians for different industries. For IT firms in the Compensation Pro data, the median compensation for a post-product founder-CEO is over $225,000. The median is exactly $200,000 in the AHR data. For other industries, median compensation for post-product CEOs is in a similar range. All industries have medians that are at least $185,000, and the corresponding averages are somewhat higher. These moments suggest that the compensation patterns from the AHR data apply in other industries and periods as well.
  Our next set of results looks at founder turnover before and after achieving product status. Rajan (2012) theorizes that at the birth of a new firm, the key human capital in a venture is not replaceable, requiring that the entrepreneur have significant control to develop a differentiated idea. This key human capital becomes more replaceable once the firm transitions from differentiation to standardization.
  If an initial product is indeed a fundamental milestone along the transition from differentiation to standardization, we should expect to see few instances prior to a firm achieving product status in which the founder is replaced but the firm survives. In other words, founder exit is likely to imply firm exit pre-product. The hazard for founder-exit and firm-exit should diverge, however, after a firm has a product.
  Consistent with this view, the summary statistics in TableIIIreflect an increased likelihood of observing non-founders in the CEO role in the AHR data after firms have a product, but not before. Only 2% of pre-product firms are led by a nonfounder CEO. This number jumps to 9% for post-product, pre-revenue firms and then increases as firms increase revenue.10This table also provides summary statistics for the components of nonfounder CEO compensation relative to founders. While non-founder CEOs are paid more in levels, the gradient in pay with respect to firm revenue is similar for founders and non-founders, whereas founders hold more equity in the firm.
  TableIVshows that after controlling for age, industry, and geography, founder-CEO turnover increases after the firm has a product. The table reports results from estimations in which an indicator for having a nonfounder in the CEO position is regressed on a post-product indicator. We conduct this analysis separately on the AHR data and using VentureSource. The first three columns report regressions using the AHR data of a nonfounder on the post-product dummy along with an increasing number of controls. The coefficient on the post-product dummy lies between 0.044 and 0.052. This analysis conditions on surviving firms, suggesting that firm failure, rather than leadership turnover, occurs for pre-product firms that are unable to achieve product development milestones.
  To investigate whether the connection between turnover and a product development milestone holds in a larger sample, columns (4) and (5) report similar regressions using the VentureSource sample for the cross section of firms in 2015 and 2017 that were backed by VC firms participating in the AHR surveys. Because VentureSource provides a view of the executive team at every financing event, we can accurately assign turnover events in an interval around financings. In this sample, 1.2% of pre-product firms are led by a nonfounder CEO. The post-product dummy has a coefficient of around 0.04, implying that turnover is again substantially more likely post-product than pre-product for these firms. Finally, column (6) uses a firm-year panel up to the year of founder-CEO replacement, allowing us to fit a hazard model of founder-CEO turnover. The sample includes all startups first financed in or after 2000. Because the data are provided in an event history format, the mean of the dependent variable is not directly comparable to prior columns. The hazard of having a founder-CEO being replaced is 0.5% per year prior to achieving product. Again, as we see in column (6), having a product increases the replacement hazard significantly. The 0.019 coefficient on post-product, combined with the constant, indicates that every year after achieving product status, the CEO replacement probability is about 2.4%, which is over four times greater than the CEO replacement hazard for pre-product firms.11

II. Founder-CEO Compensation, Time to Product, and the Attractiveness of Entrepreneurship:   Thus far we have documented the importance of a startup's initial product as a key milestone in its life cycle. At the extensive margin, this marks the point at which startups decouple from their founders and can continue to survive under new CEO management. At the intensive margin, cash compensation for CEOs rises after this milestone, even for founder-CEOs who were previously paid a fixed, low salary. A natural question that arises is whether the increase in cash compensation for founder-CEOs post-product is sufficient to insure them from the nondiversifiable risk they face at the birth of new ventures. If so, this can impact the attractiveness of selection into entrepreneurship. We address this question in this section.
  To understand which potential founders we would expect to be willing to enter entrepreneurship and which would not, we build on one of the best-known benchmark models in this literature, by Hall and Woodward (2010). Hall and Woodward model a consumption-savings problem that incorporates many realistic features of the payoffs to founders, including subordinate positions as common equity holders. A forward-looking founder understands that venture investors have liquidation preferences, while exit values are stochastic and the time to a liquidity event is unknown ex-ante. They are also among the first to use realistic risk preferences while modeling entrepreneurs' consumption and asset accumulation decisions. Their baseline model can be used to assess the attractiveness of VC-backed entrepreneurship for potential founders with different combinations of outside salary and wealth.
  Hall and Woodward (2010) approximate founder-CEOs' compensation from birth to exit with a flat salary of $150,000. However, as documented above, a relatively low and flat salary contract is applicable only pre-product, while compensation rises substantially after a startup develops a product. Understanding the degree of nondiversifiable risk that founders face therefore requires that the entrepreneur's value function in the consumption-savings problem be split into a pre- and a post-product phase, with a transition probability between these phases that determines the amount of time an entrepreneur expects to hold the low, flat salary associated with the pre-product entrepreneur contract. We build a model that incorporates these features. We begin with a baseline model to build intuition.
  Hall and Woodward (2010) assume that the flow utility is isoelastic, withu(ct)=c1−γ−11−γ$u(c_t) = \frac{c^{1-\gamma }-1}{1-\gamma }$, whereγ$\gamma$is the coefficient of relative risk aversion. A somewhat standard level of risk aversion setsγ≈2$\gamma \approx 2$. The authors also assume that entrepreneurs earn an annual pretax salary of $150,000 over the entire life of the firm and consume or save out of posttax earnings. Their baseline model provides wealth thresholds such that the certainty-equivalent value of entrepreneurship is positive at different levels of the nonentrepreneurial wage,w∗$w^*$. When the certainty equivalent is positive, founding has positive expected utility and entry is incentive compatible.
  We extend the Hall and Woodward (2010) model in three important ways. First, we allowwt$w_t$to depend on firm age and product status. Second, we show that the value function can be split into pre- and post-product phases, with a transition process between the phases. We account for the transition to product status or exit for pre-product firms and estimate the transition hazards from the data. That is, pre-product firms either transition to post-product status, exit prior to achieving a product, or continue product development. The timing of these transitions relative to the duration of the product development period potentially changes the risk that founders bear. Finally, our setup allows us to examine comparative statics; for instance, taking a year longer to achieve a product or taking a year longer to exit as a post-product firm. We relate these comparative statics to the attractiveness of founding across the income distribution, providing testable implications of the model.
  Including these extensions requires additional notation. We denote bypt+1$p_{t+1}$the probability that a pre-product firm at aget$t$will transition to having a product byt+1$t+1$. Exit probabilities depend on product status and firm age, withπt+1∼P$\pi _{t+1}^{\sim P}$andπt+1P$\pi _{t+1}^{P}$the respective probabilities of exiting at aget+1$t+1$without and with a product. We denote byEXt+1|∼P$\text{E}_{X_{t+1}|\sim P}$andEXt+1|P$\text{E}_{X_{t+1}|P}$the expectation of the founder's share of the exit value conditional on exiting att+1$t+1$for each product status.
  With probabilityπt+1P$\pi _{t+1}^{P}$, the firm exits and the founder realizes a stochastic payoff associated with an exit from the post-product distribution of exits at aget+1$t+1$. In the next period, the after-exit value function applies from equation (2), and the founder has any assets that remain from the period when the startup was active plus the assets that come from exit. With probability(1−πt+1P)$(1-\pi _{t+1}^{P})$, the firm continues and the entrepreneur receives a wage realization from the firm-age-specific distribution of wages conditional on having a product.
  Without a product, there are three state transitions. With probabilitypt+1$p_{t+1}$, the firm transitions to the post-product value function. With probabilityπt+1∼P$\pi _{t+1}^{\sim P}$, the firm exits without a product. The above means that with probability(1−πt+1∼P−pt+1)$(1-\pi _{t+1}^{\sim P} - p_{t+1})$, the firm continues with the pre-product value function.12
  We use two main sources of data to calibrate the model. Data related to firm-level outcomes and transitions come from VentureSource. The projected evolution of founder compensation is based on data from AHR and is supplemented by Compensation Pro moments from earlier periods and different industries.
  The VentureSource data contain information on the firm's industry, total exit value for firms that IPO or that have been acquired, the firm's founding year and age at exit, the firm's total capital raised, and the firm's product transition status. From the raw data, we compute product transition-by-firm age probabilities, exit probabilities-by-age conditional on product status, and the conditional distribution of exit values to the entrepreneur given product status for an exit att+1$t+1$. Like Hall and Woodward (2010), we use a number of assumptions and imputation steps to make the data suitable for calibration. These include imputing missing time to exit/failure for so-called zombie firms, imputing missing acquisition values, adjusting for unobserved timing of product transitions between funding rounds, and calculating the entrepreneurs' share of firm value in the presence of liquidation preferences.13Internet AppendixSectionIA.B1and TableIA.Vdetail how we address these issues and the number of observations that are affected by imputations.
  In choosing the period over which we use firm-level data to calibrate the model, we attempt to balance a trade-off. On the one hand, we are interested in a long time series that covers multiple VC investment cycles (Gompers and Lerner (2004)). On the other hand, we need to be careful not to truncate outcomes since we are interested in understanding the joint distribution of exit values with firm age. This is of particular importance given the documented increase in time to exit for some of the most successful firms (Ewens and Farre-Mensa (2020)). We balance this trade-off by studying exits anytime between 1987 and 2019, but we restrict the main sample to firms founded between 1987 and 2006. This restriction provides sufficient time for even the most successful firms to exit. We track firms' outcomes through the end of 2019 and convert all exit values to 2006 dollars using the Consumer Price Index (CPI) for all urban consumers.
  We use the AHR compensation data to specify the stochastic process for the evolution of founders' future wages and cash compensation. These data enter the model throughE(wt|P)$\text{E}(w_t|P)$andE(wt|∼P)$\text{E}(w_t|\sim P)$. Two possibilities for specifying these expectations are: (i) use the raw realizations of total compensation in the data conditional on firm age and product status, or (ii) use moments of the wage given age and product status to form expectations, but build in negative shocks that approximate financial distress. While both approaches yield similar results, we choose to employ the moment-based approach because future researchers will be able to implement this procedure without having access to the compensation data. We setE(wt|P)=0.9wt,Product¯+0.1×wLow$\text{E}(w_t|P)=0.9\overline{w_{t,Product}}+0.1\times w_{Low}$, wherewt,Product¯$\overline{w_{t,Product}}$is the average cash compensation observed for a firm agedt$t$with a product andwLow$w_{Low}$= $120,000. This expectation is a convex combination of the observed mean of cash compensation given age and product status in the AHR data and a low draw, which reflects the potential for future firm distress that reduces salary. For firms without a product, we setE(wt|∼P)=wt,∼Product¯$\text{E}(w_t|\sim P) = \overline{w_{t,\sim Product}}$from the AHR data. Comparing the two expectations, the post-product wage process has a jump at product status, grows with firm age, and (because the agent is risk-averse) features a probabilistic salary cut that reverts nearly back to pre-product levels,wLow$w_{Low}$. Becausewt$w_t$is posttax income, we compute average tax rates for different values of pretax income using the NBER's Statistics of Income (SOI) database of sample tax filings.
  From the model, we solve for the pre-entry salary and accumulated wealth combinations for which entrepreneurship is attractive given the product transition process, evolution of salary, time to exit, and distributions of exit values. For this calculation, we find the minimum value of wealth for a given outside salaryw∗$w^*$such that the pre-product value function in (3) exceeds the value function from not entering entrepreneurship, which we characterize for each wealth-salary combination using equation (2). We solve the model numerically. For details, see SectionIA.B2of theInternet Appendix.
  Figure4presents the first key output of our calibration. Each line in the figure traces out the minimum wealth required for founding to be attractive under a given outside salary. The area above each line represents the region in which founding a VC-backed startup is incentive-compatible. The region below each line represents missing entrepreneurs. The top line in the figure represents salary-wealth thresholds for entry to be attractive under the compensation contract that pays the founder a fixed salary of $150,000 over the life of the venture. The middle line, labeled “AHR,” represents the compensation contract that changes with product status and firm age. Finally, the lower line illustrates what would happen to the attractiveness of founding using a thought experiment where by an entrepreneur can bypass the pre-product phase altogether and directly establish a post-product company.
  The first insight from the figure is that potential entrepreneurs who earn less than $150,000 in pre-entry salary are not constrained by nondiversifiable risk from founding. The point furthest to the left on thex-axis represents an entrepreneur with an outside salary of $150,000. The wealth requirement for those earning $150,000 or less is $0, as the salary in a new venture would meet or exceed their outside earnings ability. Anyone earning less than $150,000 in the outside labor market would be able to at least maintain their level of pre-founding consumption upon entering entrepreneurship.
  Second, the figure clearly illustrates that nondiversifiable risk is most likely to deter entrepreneurial entry from those with high salaries and limited wealth. Under the fixed pay contract, a potential entrepreneur earning $400,000 in the outside labor market would require $1.2 million in liquid wealth to enter. An entrepreneur with an outside salary of $500,000 would require $2.5 million in wealth, while an outside salary of $600,000 would necessitate $4.5 million in wealth and an outside salary of $900,000 would require nearly $17.8 million in wealth. Under the flat salary contract, as potential founders' outside salary increases, the opportunity cost of entering entrepreneurship increases, which requires consumption smoothing out of savings. Wealthier individuals are able to finance this consumption in light of the possibility that the equity value upon exit will lead to future asset accumulation.
  Third, compensation that responds to product milestones makes founding more attractive for high-earning individuals relative to the flat salary of $150,000. The wealth threshold for founding to be incentive-compatible falls from $1.2 million to $640,000 for someone with an outside salary of $400,000 and from $2.5 million to $1.5 million for an outside salary of $500,000. Despite average pay that is lower than $150,000 in the pre-product period, the product signal has value when viewed through an experimentation lens (Kerr, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf (2014), Manso (2016), Dillon and Stanton (2017)), as CEOs who do not achieve product status can fail quickly and do not persist in the venture. Above $500,000 in pre-entry salary, the simple change in the compensation contract may not be enough to induce many high-earners to enter. Although the wealth threshold falls from $4.5 million to $2.9 million for someone with an outside salary of $600,000, the $2.9 million in wealth is 7.9 times the annual posttax pay for this potential entrepreneur. Someone with an outside salary of $600,000 would need to be an extreme saver or hold external wealth to justify entrepreneurial entry.
  Fourth, faster time to product can play a substantial role in reducing the burden of nondiversifiable risk for those at the top of the earnings distribution. Eliminating the pre-product phase entirely reduces the wealth threshold for someone with a $600,000 salary to $1.5 million, which is roughly four times post-tax salary. As this model holds fixed time to exit and the distribution of exit values, it demonstrates that time to product is an important determinant of the risk borne by entrepreneurs. Faster time to product unlocks greater cash compensation earlier in the life of a startup, alleviating some of the burden of nondiversifiable risk. Of course, some risk remains for the very highest earners, but the dynamic compensation contract after product milestones greatly narrows the earnings gap for those with high incomes.
  Fifth, the figure highlights the importance of considering the appropriate benchmark when considering potential “missing entrepreneurship.” On the one hand, it shows that despite nondiversifiable risk potentially deterring top earners from entry, most of the population has outside salaries such that entrepreneurship looks attractive. To show this, we note the population percentile of the income distribution corresponding to outside compensation below thex-axis in Figure4.14The righty-axis contains percentiles of the wealth distribution such that entrepreneurship has a positive certainty equivalent.15Ninety-five percent of the population earns under $150,000 and is not constrained by nondiversifiable risk.
  The incentive-compatibility question only becomes relevant at income levels exceeding around $225,000, which is the top 2.1% of the population with taxable labor income. Although we do not observe the joint distribution of income and wealth, we can approximate how many high-earners are deterred by nondiversifiable risk by treating the income and wealth distribution as bivariate lognormal, with a correlation coefficient taken from the literature.16Using this approach, about 469,000 high-earners (or 14% of the population of high-earners) would be deterred from founding under the product- and age-dependent contract.
  We note that the missing individuals under this exercise, while a relatively small share of the workforce, are likely those who are extremely consequential for innovation. That is, missing entrepreneurs are high-human-capital individuals, as reflected by their high salaries (which correlate with productivity). In other words, once the risk set is adjusted to account for the higher income of those with the highest levels of human capital, the potential consequences of missing entrepreneurs can be substantial, particularly when considered in light of the fact that around 1,500 VC-backed startups are founded every year.
  Our main focus is on startup founder-CEOs, as they are the source of differentiated ideas. However, our approach can also apply to startup employees or joiners, who potentially make important contributions to innovative companies. Our data use agreement with AHR precludes us from disclosing compensation moments for nonsenior (e.g., C-level, non-CEO) employees, but we can analyze the attractiveness of joining a startup at the senior level. We use cash and equity compensation data for these individuals as inputs into the consumption/savings models that we use to study the attractiveness of entry for founders. SectionIA.B4of theInternet Appendixpresents the results. The main finding is that very few high-income individuals join startups as non-founders at the senior level. Founders' equity stakes and cash compensation are crucial to overcome the burden of nondiversifiable risk, but joiners are paid less than founders, on average, and their equity stakes are lower. These differences make joining a startup as a non-founder harder to justify for someone with attractive outside options. Those with high outside earnings potential would need strong nonpecuniary motivations to want to join a VC-backed startup at its earliest pre-product stage.
  The discussion above highlights the importance of expected time to product in driving selection into VC-backed entrepreneurship. We turn next to quantifying its importance using variation in the observed time to product across industries and over time. We believe this exercise is fruitful for two reasons. First, our extended model is well suited to understand comparative statics with respect to time to product. We can use it, for example, to understand how changes in time to product across industries compare with other documented changes, like firms staying private longer prior to acquisition or IPO. With extended times to acquisition/IPO, the founder-CEO goes longer without access to the illiquid wealth in the venture, but increases in cash compensation that arrive sooner due to faster time to product may offset the impact on founder risk-bearing from firms that remain private longer. We can study how individuals with different salary-wealth profiles evaluate the entry decision based on the above trade-offs.
  Second, while credible assessments of the number or cost of missing entrepreneurs in the aggregate are difficult, a comparison across industries can isolate the degree to which industry-level variation in time to product impacts the amount and composition of entrepreneurial talent entering these sectors. Industry and time-series variation in time to product allows us to assess relative differences in missing entrepreneurs, providing early evidence on the particular sectors in which the supply of innovation talent is most constrained. We address each of these questions in turn.
  To isolate the importance of the product transition process, we exploit the introduction of cloud computing by Amazon Web Services in 2006, which unexpectedly and differentially impacted the time to product over the subsequent years. As described in detail by Ewens, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf (2018), who quote Amazon's Chief Technology Officer at the time, the capability behind the cloud computing platform was initially developed to service internal operations, and only later seen as a possible source of revenue by servicing outsiders. Cloud computing allowed Internet-oriented startups to rent (rather than buy) expensive equipment for their initial operations, which lowered the cost and time associated with initial experimentation through faster prototyping and reduced the need for firm-specific capital investment, and thereby speed time to product. Other industries, such as those in consumer products, healthcare, or energy and industrials, were less affected by cloud computing. Ewens, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf (2018) identify 2006 as the year when Amazon began to make cloud computing products available to users, so we use 2006 as the marker for the end of the pre-period in our data. Firms founded after 2007 are in the post-period.
  Specifically, we split the data by cloud- and noncloud-affected industries as defined by Ewens, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf (2018). We separately compute product transition rates and exit probabilities for cloud-affected and noncloud-affected industries in the pre- and post-periods. Our goal is to understand how observed changes by industry and over time in the speed to product impact the attractiveness of entrepreneurial entry. Note that although we compute separate product transition rates for each cloud- and noncloud-affected industry in both the pre- and post-periods, we hold fixed the exit value distribution for each of the cloud- and noncloud-affected industries, since as noted earlier, exit values are not observed for many firms founded during the 2007 to 2014 period.17
  As expected based on Ewens, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf (2018), the firms in cloud-affected industries transitioned to having a product (or failure) more quickly after 2006. Among the startups founded in cloud-affected industries between 2007 and 2014, 29.7% remained pre-product three years after founding, compared to 34.9% that remained pre-product in the pre-period, a reduction of 15%. Although firms in noncloud-affected industries took longer to achieve product status at baseline (56.1% remained pre-product by year 3 in the pre-period), there was minimal change in the rate of product transition by year 3 in the 2007 to 2014 cohorts of new firms in these industries (to 55.6%). This enables us to calibrate a theoretical difference-in-differences model that illustrates how the attractiveness of founder entry changes across industries and eras. SectionIA.B1of theInternet Appendixprovides the estimates ofpt+1$p_{t+1}$andπt+1∼P$\pi _{t+1}^{\sim P}$for the pre- and post-periods across cloud-affected and noncloud-affected industries. Our comparative statics analysis uses these objects to study how the attractiveness of founding changes under different times to product. We also consider another possible change over time—longer times to IPO—as firms stay private longer.
  TableVpresents differences in industry attractiveness and comparative static results. Panel A presents wealth thresholds given an outside salary for firms in cloud-affected industries and Panel B provides the same thresholds for industries not affected (or less affected) by cloud computing. The first column presents salary-wealth thresholds in the pre-period assuming that founder-CEOs earn a flat salary of $150,000 per year. The across-industry comparison of the flat salary contract shows that cloud-affected industries were more attractive even absent a product-dependent contract. For example, in cloud-affected industries, it would have taken at least $3.9 million in wealth for someone with an outside salary of $600,000 to find entrepreneurship attractive, while the threshold rises to $6.3 million for noncloud-affected industries.
  The product- and age-specific pay contract (column (2)) makes cloud-affected industries even more attractive for high-earners in the pre-period because of faster time to product. With the product-dependent compensation contract, the wealth required for someone with an outside salary of $600,000 ($750,000) to found in a cloud-affected industry falls from $3.9 million to $2.4 million ($8.4 million to $5.6 million). These thresholds are lower than those presented for the overall sample in Figure4, as firms in cloud industries in the pre-period had relative quick product development cycles compared to those in life sciences, industrial, and consumer product verticals. The equivalent thresholds change from $6.3 million to $4.3 million ($13.4 million to $10.5 million) for non-cloud industries. Using our parametric joint distribution approach to compute missing high-earning founders, we present changes in the number of missing entrepreneurs relative to the flat pay contract in column (1). The product- and age-dependent contract makes founding financially attractive for an additional 252,000 high-earners in cloud-affected industries and an additional 170,000 founders in non-cloud industries. Figure5provides a graphical comparison between industries that underlie these results.18
  The bottom line of Figure5and TableV, column (3) is that cloud-affected industries' more rapid time to product resolution in the post-period increases the attractiveness of founding, especially for those with relatively high outside salaries. Column (3) holds fixed the time to exit and the distribution of exit values from the pre-period, while applying the post-period product transition processes. Wealth thresholds fall in cloud-affected industries, drawing in an additional 313,000 potential founders relative to the flat pay contract in the pre-period and an additional 61,000 potential founders relative to the pre-period contract that uses the AHR pay moments. Recall that in the pre-period, the model suggests that nondiversifiable risk potentially deterred 14% of individuals in the top 2% of the U.S. earnings distribution from founding. The 61,000 new potential founders in software and related sectors after the introduction of cloud computing represents about 13% of those deterred from founding by nondiversifiable risk and about 2% of the total population earning more than $225,000.
  For non-cloud industries, the modest changes in product time draw in only about 24,000 additional founders relative to the pre-period AHR contract. Faster time to product, combined with compensation that responds to product milestones, makes entry more attractive.19
  Finally, the last column of TableVallows us to compare results when we increase the time to exit simultaneously with faster time to product. When comparing these results to the pre-2006 era, we can disentangle the relative importance of faster time to product or longer time to exit (for successful exits). We find that the faster time to product dominates the longer time to exit in cloud-affected industries, as wealth thresholds are lower in column (4) than in column (2).
  Taken together, these results have testable empirical implications. In particular, they imply that we should see a differential increase of founders entering VC-funded entrepreneurship from high-earning occupations in cloud-affected industries after 2006. For non-cloud industries, the modest changes in product timing draw in far fewer potential high-earning founders. While our analysis of the number of missing entrepreneurs may be sensitive to distributional assumptions, the approach is the same for cloud and non-cloud industries. This suggests that the relative change in the number of potential entrepreneurs drawn into founding is about twice as large in cloud-affected industries compared to non-cloud industries.

III. Selection into VC-Backed Entrepreneurship Based on Time to Product: Empirical Analysis:   Thus far, we have shown theoretically that the expected time to achieving a product is a key driver of the nondiversifiable risk faced by potential entrepreneurs. This is because developing an initial product marks the resolution of important uncertainty, enabling VC investors to shift founder-CEOs from an entrepreneur to a manager compensation contract. Moreover, our model calibration shows that variation in time to product across industries is quantitatively important for the attractiveness of entrepreneurship for individuals with high levels of outside earnings.
  In the third step of our analysis, we conduct an empirical investigation of selection into VC-backed entrepreneurship. Our model, calibrated using firm-level variables and startup CEO compensation, makes predictions about systematic differences in the number of founders with high pre-entry earnings who select into industries with different times to product. The empirical analysis that follows allows us to directly test these predictions using entirely different data on entrepreneurs' career histories.
  The key testable prediction related to the background of founders stems from the fact that nondiversifiable risk is most likely to deter entrepreneurial entry for those with high salaries and limited wealth. While we do not observe wealth, we use LinkedIn data to determine the age and career histories of those who become founders, which allows us to estimate their pre-entry earnings by matching based on industry, occupation code, and age to the U.S. Census Bureau's ACS. We turn next to describing the data used for the empirical analysis.
  We acquired a full download of public LinkedIn profiles as of 2017 from the data vendor DataHut. The data provider legally scraped (per a Supreme Court decision) individual and company profiles to create structured data on individual education and work experience. In total, the database includes 3,250,662 U.S.-based firms and 55,446,080 unique employees of such firms.
  We form our analysis data set by identifying founder-CEOs of U.S.-headquartered VC-backed firms that were founded between 2001 and 2016.20In total, we are able to identify founder-CEOs of 9,574 firms with biographical data available in LinkedIn, corresponding to 36% of recorded startups over this period in the VentureSource Universe. Details of the procedure used to identify founder-CEOs, validation of match rates to VentureSource, and an analysis of observable differences in startups for which we do and do not find a match are available in SectionIA.Cof theInternet Appendix. This section also reports on bias in the LinkedIn sample relative to the VentureSource universe. While we find that the LinkedIn sample is selected, we do not detect differences in our LinkedIn coverage that correlate with the diffusion of cloud computing across industries. If anything, LinkedIn is more likely to capture stronger startups in the pre-period for both cloud and non-cloud industries, which should make it less likely for us to find an increase in high-earner founders in the post-period.
  Having identified founder-CEOs in LinkedIn, we use LinkedIn profile information to develop an understanding of their pre-founding education and career history. We identify undergraduate college education (university, degree, major, and graduation year) and any graduate degrees. When available, college graduation dates allow us to impute the founder's birth year. We observe approximate founder age from their educational records for 54% of the sample. Later, when matching to the Census Bureau's ACS data, we approximate age for 33% of the sample with years of reported prior work experience if dates of school attendance are missing.
  For work experience, the data provide an individual's title, start date, and end date (if applicable) at each of their employers. Company profiles include headquarters location, short business description, and firm-assigned industry classification. In some cases, start and end dates are missing and thus we cannot use the founder-CEO's biographical data in the analysis below. Similarly, not all individuals in this sample have pre-founding experience or listed education. In both cases, for the purposes of reporting summary statistics we set related variables to missing (rather than zero) because LinkedIn does not require that a user complete their profile, so missing data are not necessarily a signal of zero education. Our results on founder background and entry patterns in subsequent analyses are not sensitive to how we code founder backgrounds with missing information, including whether we ignore founders with missing data, use subsets of founder information that we do observe, or use imputed values.
  TableVIpresents summary statistics for the sample of founder-CEOs we are able to identify in LinkedIn. On average, founder-CEOs are 35 years old and have over 11 years of work experience across four jobs prior to their venture. They are also highly educated: about three-quarters have a bachelor's degree or higher, and more than half have education beyond a bachelor's degree. The fraction with advanced degrees is significantly higher than the U.S. population. For example, the 13% of founders with a Ph.D. compares to 4.5% as reported by the U.S. Census Bureau's Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic Supplement.
  Looking across columns of TableVI, founder-CEOs of startups in industries not impacted by cloud computing appear somewhat older at founding, accounted for by their higher level of education and slightly longer work experience, on average. At first glance, the fact that these individuals founding startups in noncloud-affected industries are more educated and have more work experience might suggest they have higher pre-entry earnings. However, it is hard to make such an inference without an understanding of the specific job the individual held. For example, they may be systematically more likely to have come from occupations or industries that are lower paying despite having high levels of education. This ambiguity also highlights that relying solely on matching to LinkedIn has some limitations. We do not observe prior income, so we cannot directly validate our predictions around entry patterns among high-earners. This exploration requires a way to understand pre-founding earnings. Absent administrative data (where, due to the small number of VC-backed founders, disclosure rules would make it difficult to report exact earnings), the best approach is likely to understand the conditional distribution of earnings, given occupation, industry, and age for founders compared to nonfounders.
  We overcome these limitations by matching the LinkedIn founder-CEO sample with the Census Bureau's ACS. The ACS data are an annual representative sample containing detailed data on 1% of U.S. households. The ACS contains information on adults' education and labor force status. For those employed, it reports industry, occupation, age, and total labor income, which enable us to estimate the probability (from the ACS universe) that an individual founder had a high-earning position prior to entering entrepreneurship.
  We use a matching-on-observables approach, which requires that we know the founders' pre-entrepreneurship occupation and industry codes. SectionIA.C3of theInternet Appendixdescribes how we map LinkedIn job titles and firm names to occupation and industry codes using auxiliary data from Burning Glass and the Department of Labor's O-NET database. This match is imperfect, as it relies on unstructured data, so we account for uncertainty using multiple approaches that allow us to examine sensitivity.
  We use the 2005 1% ACS sample from IPUMS, as 2005 is the first year that the ACS instituted a sample larger than 0.5% of the population (Ruggles et al. (2021)). From the 2005 1% ACS sample, we compute the probability that an individual drawn at random from each three-digit Standard Occupation Classification (SOC) code×$\times$two-digit NAICS code×$\times$age group {20–35, 36–51, 52+} cell is above a high-earner income threshold.21We then merge this probability into the LinkedIn data.22We next sum across founders to get the number of high-earners by industry and year. Our estimation data set contains the number of high-earner founders in the LinkedIn sample in each of the 27 VentureSource industry groups between 2001 and 2016.
  While we do not observe wealth in the ACS, our model predicts that high-earners' entry rates should increase when expected time to product falls, as more founders will meet the lower wealth thresholds that rationalize entry. To conceptualize this, we test whether those above different earnings levels (our preferred level is $225,000) are more likely to become VC-backed founders in cloud-affected industries after the cloud computing shock lowers expected time to product.23
  Note that while our stylized model of financial returns has predictions for the level of entrepreneurship in the pre-period, we have abstracted from many important components of entry decisions across sectors, including the possibility that healthcare, consumer products, industrial, and energy industries might offer different compensating differentials to high-ability founders (Stern (2004)). Our test is therefore about changes in high-earning founders, which can be observed in Panel B of TableVI. In this panel, we present the estimated number of founders earning above $225,000 for the VentureSource universe of firms, which we compute by weighting the matched LinkedIn data to reflect the total amount of entry. Between the pre- and the post-periods, there are 23 more high-earning founders annually in cloud-affected industries relative to an annual baseline pre-period average of 33 founders, an increase of nearly 70%. There were about 625 startups annually in cloud-affected industries that received VC-funding in the pre-period, meaning that the 23-founder increase among those with high earnings in a prior job represents about 4% of the pre-period founders. While our model predicts a modest increase in high-earners in noncloud-affected industries, there is actually a decline of one founder per year (3% of the pre-period level).24The difference across types of industries suggests that founding did not become uniformly more attractive for high-earners, but instead that cloud-affected industries became more attractive relative to noncloud industries, where founder counts among high-earners were roughly unchanged.
  We turn now to a formal difference-in-differences test of these patterns, which allows us to present different methods of classifying high-earners, different high-earner thresholds, and different sample compositions to account for the possibility that serial entrepreneurship is driving our results.
  TableVIIpresents results for three different high-earner thresholds, while displaying two different methods for matching between the LinkedIn data and the ACS. Regardless of the threshold or matching approach, we find robust evidence that the number of high-earning founders increases in cloud-affected industries in the post-period. Columns (1) to (3) present results using matching Method 1, which assigns the lowest number of high-earning founders, while columns (4) to (6) assign the highest number.25When the entry threshold is $225,000, which is our preferred specification based on the theoretical analysis, we find that the number of high-earning founders increases by between 1.9 and 3.7 annually in each of the eight cloud-affected industries in the post-period. These estimates represent increases of 60% to 74% relative to the pre-period number of high-earning founders (displayed below each column). We find similar qualitative results under high-earner thresholds of $150,000 and $300,000. We do not examine thresholds above $300,000 because the ACS data top-code income to preserve confidentiality.
  We note that the number of high-earning founders may be higher or lower than what is reported in the table, as our matching-on-observables approach does not account for positive or negative selection on unobservables among the actual founders who enter. What is important for our differences-in-differences identification is that these unobservables do not change differentially across cloud and noncloud industries over time, allowing us to make relative comparisons. One possible violation of this identifying assumption is that our LinkedIn data quality or sampling frame may introduce differential changes for high-earners across sectors.Internet AppendixTableIA.VIIIexplores this possibility by looking at changes in an auxiliary measure of founder quality that we observe for the universe—the amount of capital invested in the first round of financing—to assess whether the LinkedIn sample's representation vis-à-vis the VentureSource universe changes across cloud and non-cloud industries in the pre- and post-periods. We find no evidence that changes in LinkedIn coverage drive our results.
  Two other interpretation issues are relevant for this analysis. The first is verification of the parallel trends assumption. Figure6, Panel A provides evidence on this assumption using a dynamic specification. We cannot reject zero differences between cloud and non-cloud industries with either classification method in the pre-period (p-values are 0.34 and 0.28). However, we see clear breaks in cloud-affected industries for firms founded after 2008, when cloud computing diffusion begins to ramp up. The post-period point estimates are jointly different from zero at the 1% level.
  The second interpretation issue surrounds serial founders. Over 30% of founders in LinkedIn have a founder or cofounder title immediately prior to their current venture. It is possible that faster time to product or failure in cloud-affected industries simply means we are picking up more churn of serial entrepreneurs who exit failed ventures and start new ones. Figure6, Panel B, accounts for this possibility by dropping entrepreneurs with founder or cofounder titles prior to their venture in question. We continue to see strong evidence of an increase in high-earning founders in cloud-affected industries relative to non-cloud industries in the post-period, with post-period point estimates that are jointly significant using Method 2 and pre-period estimates that are jointly insignificant for both specifications. We note that the implied number of additional founders is smaller (and estimates are less precise) when we examine only serial entrepreneurs, as we lose the potential for more than 30% of the total founders to be classified as high-earners. As our regressions are about counts, we would expect smaller point estimates.
  Taken together, these analyses that use the career histories of those who became founders to study realized selection into VC-backed entrepreneurship provide strong validation of the model's predictions. They highlight how entry into entrepreneurship among the highest-earning individuals in the workforce is sensitive to changes in the expected time to product. Because of this, industry-level variation in the expected time to product not only predicts differences in entry rates, but also affects the composition of entrants across the pre-entry earnings distribution. Those in the highest percentiles of earnings in the workforce are disproportionately more likely to start ventures in industries in which the expected time to product is faster. To the extent that earnings are correlated with ability, this is likely to impact the distribution of entrepreneurial talent across industries. Moreover, the fact that individuals' backgrounds play an important role in shaping the startups they found is also likely to have implications for the supply of innovative ideas across industries.

IV. Conclusion:   In this paper, we combine several novel sources of data with a dynamic model of selection into entrepreneurship to study the length of time founder-CEOs hold nondiversifiable risk, and the implications this has for constraints in the supply of entrepreneurial talent to VC-backed startups. We show that although founder-CEOs start with a low salary, the increases in CEOs' cash compensation after a startup begins product development are large enough that nondiversifiable risk held by founder-CEOs falls substantially after achieving this milestone. In turn, this implies that a startup's expected time to developing its first product is a key determinant of the attractiveness of VC-backed entrepreneurship.
  Based on the differential reductions in expected time to product following the introduction of cloud computing services for software and Internet startups, our model predicts that twice as many individuals in the highest 2% of the pre-entry earnings distribution would have an entrepreneurial entry constraint relaxed in industries that benefited from cloud computing relative to those not impacted by cloud computing. Empirical analysis of founder backgrounds and estimates of pre-founding earnings provides strong support for the theoretical predictions. In doing so, we provide early evidence for particular sectors in which the supply of entrepreneurial talent, and hence VC-backed innovation, may be most likely to be constrained.
  Our results highlight an underappreciated role of VC investors—intermediate liquidity providers—that they might be uniquely positioned to play as hands-on investors. This role of VCs as liquidity providers may also help explain the sectors in which VCs are more actively involved in financing innovation. The faster resolution of uncertainty for firms in certain sectors implies a lower need for VCs to provide intermediate liquidity to founders to induce them to become entrepreneurs. Sectors in which uncertainty is resolved more slowly are those in which the burden of nondiversifiable risk is likely to be most extreme. The degree to which these individuals' ideas are not commercialized (or commercialized inside incumbent firms) as well as the aggregate impact of this selection remains an interesting area of further work.
  Editors: Stefan Nagel, Philip Bond, Amit Seru, and Wei Xiong

Supporting Information:   Appendix S1: Internet Appendix.
  Replication Code.
  Please note: The publisher is not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting information supplied by the authors. Any queries (other than missing content) should be directed to the corresponding author for the article.
