TITLE:Information technology and lender competition
Abstract:We study how information technology (IT) affects lender competition, entrepreneurs’ investment, and welfare in a spatial model. The effects of an IT improvement depend on whether it weakens the influence of lender–borrower distance on monitoring costs. If it does, it has a hump-shaped effect on entrepreneurs’ investment and social welfare. If not, competition intensity does not vary, improving lender profits, entrepreneurs’ investment, and social welfare. When entrepreneurs’ moral hazard problem is severe, IT-induced competition is more likely to reduce investment and welfare. We also find that lenders’ price discrimination is not welfare-optimal. Our results are consistent with received empirical work on lending to SMEs.
1. Introduction: The banking industry is undergoing a digital revolution. A growing number of financial technology (FinTech) companies and BigTech platforms are engaging in traditional banking businesses using their innovative information and automation technologies.1 Incumbent banks are also moving from reliance on physical branches to adopting information technology (IT) and Big Data in response to the availability of technology and to changes in consumer expectations of service, which are two main drivers of digital disruption (FSB, 2019). Such a transformation spurs the banking sector’s increasing investment in IT, allowing financial intermediaries to offer personalized services and to price discriminate. The COVID-19 pandemic has accelerated this digitalization process and fostered remote loan operations and the development and diffusion of IT in the credit market (Carletti et al., 2020).How do the development and diffusion of information technology affect lending competition? What are the welfare implications of IT progress? In particular, does the type of IT matter for competition and welfare? Is there a welfare loss from price discrimination? To answer those questions, we build a model of spatial competition in which lenders compete to provide entrepreneurs with loans. Lenders in our model refer to institutions that can provide loans in the credit market, including commercial banks, shadow banks, fintechs, or BigTech platforms. Our model will help to illuminate the following empirical results:•Business lending by banks with better IT adoption is less affected by the distance between banks and their borrowers (Ahnert et al., 2024).•Borrowers with better access to bank financing request loans at lower interest rates on a fintech’s platform (Butler et al., 2017). A bank will charge its borrowers higher loan rates if the borrowers get geographically closer to the bank or/and farther away from competing banks (Herpfer et al., 2022).•Increased bank/branch industry specialization (e.g., in export/ SME) lending curtails bank competition (Paravisini et al., 2023, Duquerroy et al., 2022). Broadband internet implementation intensifies bank competition and reduces banks’ loan prices (D’Andrea et al., 2021).•Banks with superior IT adoption have higher loan growth (Dadoukis et al., 2021 and Branzoli et al., 2024). Entrepreneurship is stronger in US counties that are more exposed to IT-intensive banks (Ahnert et al., 2024).•The relationship between bank competition and bank credit supply is hump-shaped (Di Patti and Dell’Ariccia, 2004).The lending market is modeled as a linear city à la Hotelling (1929) where two lenders located at the two extremes of the city compete for entrepreneurs who are distributed along the segment. Entrepreneurs can undertake scalable risky investment projects, which may succeed or fail, and have no initial capital. Hence, they require funding from lenders. Lenders have no direct access to investment projects and compete in a Bertrand fashion by simultaneously posting their discriminatory loan rate schedules. We take it as given that IT is advanced enough for lenders to price flexibly. An entrepreneur can shirk and derive a private benefit, which is ex-ante random and unobservable, after obtaining loans from the lender; if she shirks, her investment project will fail for sure. A critical lender function is monitoring entrepreneurs to reduce their private benefits of shirking (see, e.g., Holmstrom and Tirole, 1997). Monitoring is more costly for a lender if there is a larger distance between the lender and the monitored entrepreneur. This distance can be physical2 or in the characteristics space from the lender’s expertise in certain sectors or industries.3 After an entrepreneur has chosen a lender for funding, her private benefit of shirking becomes observable to the lender, which will then adjust credit availability – modeled as the maximum size of the loan available to the entrepreneur – based on the observed private benefit. For simplicity, we assume that lenders can provide loans at a given marginal funding cost and do not model how lenders compete to develop relationships with investors or depositors.4The model has two important ingredients: First, lender monitoring matters for welfare since it enables entrepreneurs with moral hazard problems to obtain credit and invest. Second, lenders cannot credibly commit to monitoring effort ex ante since they can adjust credit availability later (after observing entrepreneurs’ private benefits).We distinguish two types of information technology: (a) information collection/processing technology (IT-basic for short) and (b) distance friction-reducing technology (IT-distance for short). Improvements in the two types of IT generate different outcomes. Specifically, an improvement in IT-basic lowers evenly the costs of monitoring entrepreneurs in different locations. Such an improvement in the lending sector does not affect lenders’ relative cost advantage in different locations – for example, by improving the ability to collect more valuable data and process them with better computer hardware or information management software (e.g., desktop applications). In contrast, improving IT-distance reduces the negative effect of lender–borrower distance on monitoring costs. Such an improvement lowers more significantly the costs of monitoring entrepreneurs located farther away. For example, better internet connectivity and communication technology (e.g., video conferencing) reduce the physical distance friction.5 The improvement in remote learning devices, search engines, and artificial intelligence (AI) makes it easier to extend expertise, thereby reducing the expertise distance friction. Big Data and machine learning techniques may improve both IT-basic and IT-distance.6Under the set-up described, we study how information technology affects lender competition and obtain results consistent with the available empirical evidence. The equilibrium consequences of improvements in the two types of technology (IT-basic v.s. IT-distance) are compared. We find that by adopting more advanced IT, whatever its type, a lender can charge higher loan rates and provide more loans. This is so because a lender’s IT progress increases its competitive advantage over its rival.When both lenders make technological progress, that progress will not increase the overall competitive advantage of either lender. In this case, different types of IT progress can yield different results. If IT progress reduces the costs of monitoring an entrepreneur without altering lenders’ relative cost advantage (i.e., IT-basic improves), lenders’ competition intensity will not be affected. In this case, the loan rates that lenders offer to entrepreneurs do not vary; lenders become more profitable and provide more loans because monitoring is now cheaper (i.e., monitoring efficiency is higher). However, if IT progress involves a weakening in the influence of lender–borrower distance on monitoring costs (i.e., IT-distance improves), lenders’ competition intensity will increase because their differentiation becomes smaller. Then, the loan rates offered to entrepreneurs decline for both lenders. Such a differentiation-reducing effect decreases lenders’ profits despite the fact that IT progress makes monitoring cheaper.The effect of IT-distance progress on lenders’ credit supply is “hump-shaped”. IT-distance progress generates three effects on loan supply: First, it improves lenders’ monitoring efficiency, tending to increase their credit supply. Second, lenders’ differentiation and loan rates decrease, increasing entrepreneurs’ skin in the game and alleviating moral hazard; this effect also tends to increase credit supply. Finally, lenders’ skin in the game decreases, reducing their monitoring incentives and willingness to supply credit. The first two effects dominate and increase lenders’ credit supply and entrepreneurs’ investment when IT-distance is not sufficiently advanced (i.e., when lender differentiation is high), while the last effect – the decrease in lenders’ monitoring incentives – dominates and reduces lenders’ credit supply and entrepreneurs’ investment when IT-distance is sufficiently advanced. Moreover, as entrepreneurs’ moral hazard problem becomes more severe, the last effect will be more likely to dominate the first two. The reason is that a more severe moral hazard problem increases the need for monitoring, hence making the provision of monitoring incentives (determined by lenders’ skin in the game) more important to credit supply. In contrast, IT-basic progress unambiguously increases lenders’ credit supply since it has no differentiation effect.Our model can shed light on the competition between a traditional bank – which has better access to firm data and hence an advantage in IT-basic – and a fintech lender with better IT-distance and lack of firm data. With its better IT-basic, the bank can ensure a positive market share because it has higher monitoring efficiency than the fintech when serving firms sufficiently close to the bank. The implication is that although fintechs, with their advantage in IT-distance, can bring competitive pressure to banks, the latter will not be completely replaced. Moreover, if the bank has a cheaper funding source (e.g., deposits) than the fintech, then the bank will offer lower loan rates and volumes than the fintech when serving entrepreneurs of similar characteristics.Next, we analyze the welfare effects of information technology progress. We find that more intense competition does not always favor social welfare. When lender competition is not intense, increasing competition intensity improves welfare because it increases entrepreneurs’ skin in the game from excessively low levels and substantially alleviates their moral hazard problem. Yet “too much” competition reduces social welfare because high competition intensity decreases lenders’ skin in the game and their monitoring incentives, thereby reducing lenders’ willingness to extend credit supply. Hence, an improvement in IT-distance – which decreases lender differentiation – may or may not benefit social welfare owing to the consequent increased lender competition. IT-distance progress will be more likely to reduce social welfare when entrepreneurs’ moral hazard problem is more severe because the need for monitoring will increase in this case, making lenders’ monitoring incentives more crucial. In contrast, improving lenders’ IT-basic has no differentiation effect and hence improves welfare unambiguously.From the social point of view, the welfare-maximizing loan rate does not depend on lenders’ IT. This rate represents the socially optimal way to share the project value between an entrepreneur and her lender. Although a lender’s IT determines the value of a project it finances (i.e., the size of the pie), the welfare-maximizing way to share the pie must balance the severity of the entrepreneur’s moral hazard and the lender’s monitoring incentive, which is a trade-off independent of the lender’s IT. The implication is that lenders’ price discrimination will generate inefficient equilibrium outcomes: A lender will price aggressively at far-away locations – where the lender’s IT advantage is low – to gain as much business as possible while at locations close to the lender’s area of specialization it will price very high to exploit its high IT advantage. Such a strategy does not balance the severity of moral hazards well with the lender’s monitoring incentive at each location. Regulators can improve welfare by setting a proper reference loan rate for lenders and limiting their ability to price discriminate.Related literature. Our work builds on the spatial competition models of Hotelling (1929) and Thisse and Vives (1988) but focuses on lenders’ competition to finance entrepreneurs’ projects. Villas-Boas and Schmidt-Mohr (1999) build a spatial model studying how lending competition affects the collateral requirements of bank contracts. Several papers have emphasized the importance of monitoring in lending.7 Almazan (2002) studies how lender capitalization, interest rates, and regulatory shocks affect monitoring efficiency in a spatial competition model where lenders have no market power over entrepreneurs. Martinez-Miera and Repullo (2019) examine the effectiveness of monetary and macroprudential policies in addressing a financial system’s risks within a framework where lender monitoring can increase the probability that investing in an entrepreneur yields a positive return.8 Different from the aforementioned papers, our model focuses on how different types of IT progress (IT-basic v.s. IT-distance) generate different effects on lenders’ monitoring, market power, entrepreneurs’ investment, and welfare.Our paper also belongs to the literature studying information technology and lending competition. Hauswald and Marquez (2006) extend the adverse selection model in Hauswald and Marquez (2003) and show that the equilibrium loan rates received by borrowers are decreasing in the lender–borrower distance and in the intensity of lender competition (measured by the number of lenders), similar to our model prediction. However, our model builds on a different mechanism – entrepreneurs’ moral hazard and lender monitoring (as in Holmstrom and Tirole, 1997) – and we analyze the relationship between the severity of entrepreneurs’ moral hazard and the equilibrium effects of IT progress. Furthermore, our results differ from those of Hauswald and Marquez (2006), in which an improvement in the lending sector’s IT will soften lender competition, and social welfare increases in the intensity of lender competition if competition is already very intense. In contrast, we find that lender competition is either intensified or unaffected by the lending sector’s IT improvements, depending on the type of improved IT, and that social welfare decreases in the intensity of lender competition if competition is very intense.In a model where a traditional bank and a fintech lender compete to extend loans, He et al. (2023) analyze the effects of “open banking” – an information sharing mechanism that enables borrowers to share their customer data stored in a bank with a fintech that has advanced information processing technology but less access to customer data. They find that open banking increases the fintech’s screening ability but that it can soften lending competition and hurt borrowers if the fintech is “over-empowered” by the data sharing mechanism. Our work has a different focus: we distinguish two types of information technology and compare their different equilibrium consequences. In addition, we show that one lender’s IT progress and the entire lending sector’s IT progress generate quite different equilibrium outcomes.Our theoretical framework is relevant to the empirical literature on information technology adoption in the lending market, which has thrived owing to the rise of FinTech in recent years.9 To start with, there is considerable evidence showing that IT makes non-traditional data useful for assessing the quality of borrowers.10 Moreover, a wide stream of research documents the lending efficiency increase brought about by information technology.11 Several papers provide evidence consistent with our results. Branzoli et al. (2024) and Dadoukis et al. (2021) find that banks with higher IT adoption have larger loan growth; this is consistent with our finding that an improvement of a lender’s IT increases its lending volume. D’Andrea et al. (2021) find that broadband internet implementation intensifies bank competition and reduces banks’ loan prices, which is consistent with the effect of IT-distance progress in our model. Ahnert et al. (2024) document that small business lending by banks with higher IT adoption is less affected by the distance between the bank headquarters and their borrowers. Our model aligns with this finding. Ahnert et al. (2024) also find that job creation by young enterprises, a proxy for entrepreneurship, is stronger in US counties that are more exposed to IT-intensive banks; consistent with this finding, our model shows that IT-basic progress in the lending sector spurs credit supply and entrepreneurial investment. However, IT-distance progress intensifies lender competition, so its effect on lenders’ credit supply is hump-shaped, which is consistent with Di Patti and Dell’Ariccia (2004).12The rest of our paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the model setup. Section 3 examines the lending market equilibrium, and Section 4 examines the effects of information technology. Section 5 provides a welfare analysis of information technology progress. We conclude in Section 6 with a summary of our findings. Appendix A presents the proofs while other appendices deal with model extensions.Download: Download high-res image (74KB)Download: Download full-size imageFig. 1. The economy.
2. The model: The economy and players. The economy is represented by a linear “city”, of length 1, that is inhabited by entrepreneurs and lenders. At each location, there is one penniless entrepreneur. A point on the city represents the characteristics of the entrepreneur (type of project, technology, geographical position, industry, . . .) at this location, and two close points mean that the entrepreneurs in those locations are similar.There are two lenders, labeled by i∈{1,2}, located at the two extremes of the city. Hence, a lender is closer to some entrepreneurs than to others. This means, for example, that lenders are specialized in different sectors of the economy (see Paravisini et al., 2023 for export-related lending, Duquerroy et al., 2022 for SME lending and Giometti and Pietrosanti, 2023 for syndicated corporate loans). If the distance between an entrepreneur and lender 1 is z, we say that the entrepreneur is located at (location) z. As a result, the distance between the entrepreneur at z and lender 2 is 1−z. Fig. 1 gives an illustration of the economy.Entrepreneurs and investment projects. Each entrepreneur has no initial capital and is endowed with a scalable risky investment project; hence, entrepreneurs require funding from lenders to undertake projects.An entrepreneur’s project return depends on (a) whether the entrepreneur shirks and (b) the entrepreneur’s investment size. If the entrepreneur at z invests I(z) and does not shirk, her project yields the following risky return (where R>0): R̃(I(z))=I(z)Rwith probabilityp,0with probability1−p. In the event of success (resp. failure) – which happens with probability p (resp. 1−p) – the entrepreneur’s project yields I(z)R (resp. 0). The success probability p∈(0,1) is a constant.13 Project returns are independent for entrepreneurs who do not shirk. Lenders post loan rates and provide credit to entrepreneurs. If the entrepreneur at z borrows Ii(z) units of funds from lender i (i∈{1,2}) at loan rate ri(z), the entrepreneur must promise to repay Ii(z)ri(z).The funding costs of lenders. We assume lenders can provide loans at a given marginal funding cost, f.14 Appendix B analyzes the case where the two lenders have different marginal funding costs. We let pR−f>0 hold, meaning that entrepreneurs’ projects can generate positive expected returns net of funding cost.Shirking opportunity and lender monitoring. An entrepreneur can shirk and derive a private benefit from investment. Following Holmstrom and Tirole (1997), we assume that shirking brings the entrepreneur (at z) a total private benefit of Ii(z)B̃(z) if she invests Ii(z) units of funds without being monitored, where B̃(z)>0 is the random marginal private benefit derived from a unit of investment. If the entrepreneur shirks, her investment project fails (i.e., returns 0) for sure.Before the entrepreneur at z determines which lender to borrow from, B̃(z) is random and unobservable to entrepreneurs and lenders. The random variable B̃(z) is independent across locations z and follows a binary distribution: (1)Prob.(B̃(z)=B)=kandProb.(B̃(z)=b)=1−k,with B>b and k∈[0,1]. From lenders’ perspective, the shirking opportunity gives rise to the entrepreneurs’ moral hazard problem, which is more severe when B̃(z)=B than when B̃(z)=b. Therefore, a higher k implies a higher ex-ante severity of entrepreneurs’ moral hazard problem. We assume B<f, implying that shirking is always socially undesirable since it cannot generate a non-negative return net of funding costs.After the entrepreneur at z builds her lending relationship with lender i, B̃(z) realizes and becomes observable to both the entrepreneur and the lender. Then, lender i can monitor the entrepreneur and decrease her private benefit of shirking by mi(z), the lender’s monitoring intensity at z. As a result, the entrepreneur will not shirk if and only if the following incentive compatibility (IC) condition holds: (2)pIi(z)(R−ri(z))≥Ii(z)B̃(z)−mi(z)[IC].If the entrepreneur does not shirk, her expected utility (i.e., profit) is the left-hand side of (2): she receives Ii(z)(R−ri(z)) in the event of success, which happens with probability p. If she shirks, her utility becomes Ii(z)B̃(z)−mi(z) since the project returns 0.Credit limit. After observing B̃(z), lender i can set a loan size upper-bound Ii¯(z) (“credit limit”) for the entrepreneur at z to control moral hazard by capping her investment scale. Since the entrepreneur’s funding comes from the lender, the entrepreneur’s investment scale cannot exceed Ii¯(z) (i.e., Ii(z)∈[0,Ii¯(z)]).In our model, lender i manages its borrowers’ moral hazard through two channels: (a) monitoring (represented by mi(z)), and (b) controlling credit availability (represented by Ii¯(z)). Our setup is consistent with the theory and evidence of Acharya et al. (2014), in which banks discipline borrowers by combining monitoring and the capacity to adjust credit lines based on future information.15Non-trivial moral hazard. Throughout the paper, we assume that the marginal private benefit B̃(z) is sufficiently large such that the moral hazard problem is not trivial: (3)B̃(z)≥2(pR−f),which is equivalent to B>b≥2(pR−f). Inequality (3) implies that, without monitoring, an entrepreneur’s per-unit expected pledgeable income cannot make lenders break even.16 To see this, consider that the entrepreneur at z borrows from lender i with the loan rate ri(z). Without monitoring, she will not shirk if and only if p(R−ri(z))≥B̃(z), implying pri(z)≤pR−B̃(z); that is, the entrepreneur can at most pledge an expected marginal return of pR−B̃(z) to lender i. However, Inequality (3) implies pri(z)≤pR−B̃(z)<f, so the entrepreneur’s expected pledgeable income cannot cover lender i’s funding costs if there is no monitoring. As a result, lenders must monitor borrowers when lending.Monitoring and information technology. If the entrepreneur at z borrows from lender i and is monitored with intensity mi(z), the lender incurs the monitoring cost: (4)Ci(mi(z),z)=ci2(1−qisi)(mi(z))2.Here ci>0, qi∈[0,1), and si is the distance between lender i and location z; hence, we have si=z (resp. si=1−z) if i=1 (resp. i=2). The parameters ci and qi are inverse measures of the efficiency of lender i’s information technology. Parameter ci is the slope of marginal monitoring costs when lender–borrower distance is zero, and hence represents lender i’s basic monitoring efficiency (IT-basic). Parameter qi (IT-distance of lender i) measures the negative effect of lender–borrower “distance friction” on the lender’s information collection and data analysis.17 The cost function (4) captures the idea that a lender has a greater capacity to discipline nearby borrowers and must expend more effort to monitor entrepreneurs who are more distant from the lender’s expertise or geographic location.18RemarkThe cost function (4) has two crucial properties when q1=q2=q and c1=c2=c. First, the ratio of the two lenders’ monitoring costs at location z (i.e., C1(m1,z)/C2(m2,z)) is independent of c for any given m1 and m2: C1(m1,z)C2(m2,z)=1−q(1−z)1−qz(m1m2)2. This property implies that increasing c does not affect a lender’s relative cost advantage, although it makes monitoring more costly for both lenders. The second property is (5)∂2(C1(m1,z)C2(m2,z))∂z∂q=2(1−q(1−z))(1−qz)3(m1m2)2>0,which means that the sensitivity of the relative cost advantage to z is increasing in q. Note that C1(m1,z)/C2(m2,z) is increasing in z. Therefore, a higher q not only makes monitoring more costly but also magnifies the importance of lender specialization by increasing the importance of distance in determining the relative cost advantage of a lender’s monitoring.Interpretation of monitoring. Lenders typically monitor their borrowers through information collection and analysis (Minnis and Sutherland, 2017, Gustafson et al., 2021, Branzoli and Fringuellotti, 2022). Specifically, lenders can collect entrepreneurs’ data (e.g., by onsite visits or frequently requesting information) and assess whether funds are diverted toward private benefits. If borrowers are not acting appropriately, lenders can provide warnings and threats, disciplining borrowers and potentially improving their behavior.19 Eq. (4) captures the fact that a lender’s efficiency of information acquisition and processing depends on not only its basic capability but also the distance friction.The distance friction can be interpreted in two ways. First, we can view si as the “physical distance” between location z and lender i. Physical distance matters because first-hand borrower information often contains soft information that is hard to convey to distant loan officers, incurring informativeness loss in the process of remote information transmission (see Liberti and Petersen, 2019). The second way is to view si as the “expertise distance” between an entrepreneur’s characteristics and lender i’s s specialization. The effectiveness of an information analysis framework will be lower when it is used to deal with firms beyond the framework’s intended scope of application (e.g., a framework for a food company or a real estate company).Distance friction can be weakened by some technologies. The diffusion of the internet and the development of communication technology (like smartphones, mobile apps, social media, or video conferencing) facilitate remote information collection and exchange, reducing the friction caused by physical distance. The friction of the expertise distance can be weakened if an IT improvement facilitates human capital’s expansion of specialized areas. For example, improvements in remote learning, search engines, and AI (like GPT) make it easier for loan officers to process the information of firms they do not specialize in, thereby decreasing qi.Technologies that decrease ci are related to improvements in lenders’ basic efficiency of information acquisition and/or processing, such as advances in chip technology and cloud computing/storage, adopting better software (e.g., desktop applications, see He et al., 2022), and exploiting new sources of information (like transaction data and digital footprints) with machine learning (ML) techniques.20One consequence of technological progress is the increased availability of cheap but imprecise data (see Dugast and Foucault, 2018). In this case, information acquisition becomes easier but the decrease in data quality increases the difficulty of information processing. The net change of ci depends on which effect dominates.Some technologies decrease both ci and qi: ML with Big Data decreases ci by improving lender i’s ability to acquire and process information. It also helps to harden soft information (e.g., digital footprints) and hence reduces the reliance on lenders’ expertise in certain areas, which lowers qi. Table 1 summarizes the technology improvements and the corresponding effects on monitoring efficiency.Competition with discriminatory loan pricing. Lenders compete in a localized Bertrand fashion to attract entrepreneurs. Lender i follows a discriminatory pricing policy in which the loan rate ri(z) varies as a function of the entrepreneurial location z.21Download: Download high-res image (135KB)Download: Download full-size imageFig. 2. Timeline.Table 1. Technology improvements and monitoring efficiency.Improvement of efficiencyRelated technologyDecreasing ci (improvement in collecting or/and processing information)ML with big/unconventional data advances in cloud storage and computing, information management softwareDecreasing qi (physical distance friction) (improvement in communication)Diffusion of internet, video conferencing, smartphone, mobile apps, social mediaDecreasing qi (expertise distance friction) (extending competence of human capital/hardening soft information)ML with big/unconventional data, remote learning and AIThe timing of the duopoly lending game is shown in Fig. 2. First, lenders (without observing B̃(z)) post loan rate schedules simultaneously. Once the loan rate schedules are chosen and posted, entrepreneurs (without observing B̃(z)) decide which lender to approach for credit. Then, lender–borrower relationships are established, and B̃(z) realizes and becomes observable to both the entrepreneur at z and her lender. Next, lender i determines its optimal monitoring intensity mi(z) and credit limit Ii¯(z) depending on its entrepreneurs’ locations. Entrepreneurs choose their investment based on available credit limits, that is, Ii(z)∈[0,Ii¯(z)]. Finally, entrepreneurs determine whether to shirk.Key ingredients. Compared with a traditional (Hotelling, 1929) model (where sellers with heterogeneous production costs compete for consumers), our model has two additional ingredients. The first ingredient is that lenders’ effort (monitoring) matters for welfare since it enables entrepreneurs to invest.22 The second ingredient is that lenders cannot commit to effort ex ante (lenders can set their monitoring intensities and credit limits based on the new information B̃(z) after entrepreneurs have chosen lenders).
3. Equilibrium: In this section, we first derive some optimal decisions of lenders and entrepreneurs and then solve for the equilibrium loan rates. Since lenders’ loan rates can vary with entrepreneurial locations, there is localized Bertrand competition between lenders at each location. Without loss of generality, we concentrate on location z and analyze how lenders set loan rates to compete for the entrepreneur at z.3.1. Optimal monitoring intensity, credit limit, and entrepreneurs’ decisionsIt is easy to see that the entrepreneur at z always uses up her credit limit for investment (i.e., Ii(z)=Ii¯(z) holds when she is served by lender i). After ri(z), mi(z), and Ii¯(z) have been determined, the entrepreneur’s ex-post expected utility is as follows: (6)maxIi(z)∈[0,Ii¯(z)]Ii(z)pR−ri(z),Ii(z)B̃(z)−mi(z),so Ii(z)=Ii¯(z) is obviously her optimal choice.Optimal monitoring intensity. Lender i can anticipate Ii(z)=Ii¯(z) when determining its monitoring intensity mi(z) at z. Since an entrepreneur’s shirking implies the failure of her project and a zero return to the lender, lenders must prevent their entrepreneurs from shirking when providing loans, yielding the following lemma.Lemma 1If lender i provides loans to the entrepreneur at z with loan rate ri(z) and observes B̃(z), its optimal monitoring intensity is: (7)mi(z)=Ii¯(z)(B̃(z)−p(R−ri(z))),where Ii¯(z) is the lender’s credit limit at z.With Ii(z)=Ii¯(z), Lemma 1 means Condition (2) holds with equality. For lenders, the only benefit of costly monitoring is to prevent entrepreneurs’ shirking. Hence, lender i will choose mi(z) as low as possible, subject to Condition (2), which ensures that the entrepreneur will not shirk.According to Eq. (7), a higher monitoring intensity is needed as the credit limit (which equals investment) increases. The reason is that a larger credit size implies private benefits must be reduced more (by monitoring) to ensure Condition (2). Consistent with the result, Heitz et al. (2023) document that a bank will monitor a borrower more frequently if the loan amount is larger.In addition, note that mi(z) is increasing in B̃(z)−p(R−ri(z)), which reflects the severity of the entrepreneur’s moral hazard. To see this, recall that p(R−ri(z)) is the marginal expected return (i.e., skin in the game) to the entrepreneur at z if she does not shirk. Thus, B̃(z)−p(R−ri(z)) measures the potential net benefit she can derive from a unit of investment by shirking. As B̃(z)−p(R−ri(z)) increases, shirking becomes more attractive, so a higher monitoring intensity is needed to prevent shirking. Obviously, increasing ri(z) will reduce the entrepreneur’s skin in the game p(R−ri(z)), thereby increasing B̃(z)−p(R−ri(z))) and the need for monitoring.Optimal credit limit. According to the timeline, an entrepreneur has decided which lender to borrow from before lenders determine credit limits. If the entrepreneur at z approaches lender i, then the lender’s expected profit from financing the entrepreneur can be written as (8)πiz=Ii¯(z)(pri(z)−f)−ci21−qisimiz2.The first term of πi(z) is the entrepreneur’s expected loan repayment minus the funding costs. Specifically, if monitoring prevents shirking, lender i will receive the entrepreneur’s full loan repayment Ii¯(z)ri(z) with probability p (i.e., in the event of project success). The funding costs are Ii¯(z)f. The second term of πi(z) represents lender i’s monitoring costs.Lender i chooses its optimal credit limit Ii¯(z) to maximize its expected profit πi(z), taking ri(z) as given; the result is presented in Lemma 2.Lemma 2If lender i provides loans to the entrepreneur at z with loan rate ri(z) and observes B̃(z), its optimal credit limit is: Ii¯(z)=1−qisicipri(z)−f(B̃(z)−p(R−ri(z)))2. The entrepreneur’s investment size Ii(z) equals Ii¯(z).Recall that a larger credit limit or more severe moral hazard needs a higher monitoring intensity (Lemma 1). Hence, Ii¯(z) is determined by how much moral hazard lender i’s monitoring can alleviate. There are three factors affecting Ii¯(z): (a) lender i’s information technology at z, which is represented by (1−qisi)/ci, (b) the lender’s skin in the game pri(z)−f, and (c) the entrepreneur’s potential net benefit of shirking, which is B̃(z) minus the entrepreneur’s skin in the game p(R−ri(z)). First, Ii¯(z) is increasing in (1−qisi)/ci because better IT implies a higher monitoring efficiency (i.e., monitoring becomes cheaper). Second, Ii¯(z) is increasing in pri(z)−f because a higher lender i’s skin in the game increases its willingness to provide credit and monitoring. Finally, Ii¯(z) is increasing in p(R−ri(z)) because a higher entrepreneur’s skin in the game makes the moral hazard problem less severe (i.e., B̃(z)−p(R−ri(z)) becomes smaller), reducing the need for monitoring. Note that increasing ri(z) increases lender i’s skin in the game but decreases the entrepreneur’s, so the net effect of changing ri(z) on Ii¯(z) is ambiguous (to be analyzed later in detail).Entrepreneurs’ decisions. After observing the loan rates posted by lenders, an entrepreneur will approach the lender that can provide higher ex-ante expected entrepreneurial utility. If lender i offers loan rate ri(z) at z, then its expected credit limit E[Ii¯(z)] (based on Lemma 2 and the distribution of B̃(z)) is as follows: (9)E[Ii¯(z)]=1−qisicikpri(z)−fB−pR−ri(z)2+(1−k)pri(z)−fb−pR−ri(z)2. As a result, the entrepreneur’s ex-ante expected utility is: (10)U(qi,ci,si,ri(z))≡E[Ii¯(z)]︸given in Eq. (9)×pR−ri(z),which takes into consideration that lender monitoring will prevent shirking. Inequality (3) ensures that U(qi,ci,si,ri(z)) is a concave function of ri(z). Note that the entrepreneur’s expected utility depends not only on her skin in the game p(R−ri(z)) but also on the expected credit limit E[Ii¯(z)], which is her expected investment. The latter is affected by lender i’s IT and skin in the game. Therefore, the entrepreneur does not simply choose the lender with a lower loan rate. If U(q1,c1,z,r1(z))>U(q2,c2,1−z,r2(z)), obviously the entrepreneur will approach lender 1 for loans.3.2. Equilibrium loan ratesIn this section, we study how lenders determine their loan rates.Best loan rate and monopoly loan rate. Before proceeding, we define two notable loan rates of lender i.Definition 1Lender i’s best loan rate at z is the loan rate that maximizes the ex-ante expected utility of the entrepreneur at z. Lender i’s monopoly loan rate at z is the loan rate lender i would choose if it faced no competition at z.The best loan rate determines how much utility a lender can provide in the Bertrand competition, while the monopoly loan rate determines the maximum profit a lender can earn. The following lemma characterizes the two loan rates.Lemma 3At any location, a lender’s best loan rate, denoted by r̲, is increasing in k and independent of qi, ci, and si, and satisfies f/p<r̲<R. Hence, the maximum expected utility lender i can provide to the entrepreneur at z is U(qi,ci,si,r̲). A lender’s monopoly loan rate is R. Lenders will offer loan rates within the interval [r̲,R].If lender i faces no competition at z, it always prefers a higher loan rate. Hence, its profit-maximizing strategy is to offer the highest possible loan rate R and monitor the entrepreneur at z to prevent shirking. Under this strategy, the lender extracts the entire project value, leaving zero surplus to the entrepreneur.When ri(z)=r̲, the utility U(qi,ci,si,ri(z)) reaches its maximum. The best loan rate r̲ is higher than f/p, implying that lowering ri(z) may not always increase a lender’s attractiveness to entrepreneurs. The reason is that entrepreneurs care about not only the loan rate but also the expected credit limit (see Eq. (9)). If ri(z) is lower than r̲, lender i’s skin in the game and the monitoring incentive will be very small. In this case, further reducing ri(z) will decrease E[Ii¯(z)] rapidly, thereby hurting the entrepreneur at z. As ri(z) approaches f/p, the lender’s skin in the game pri(z)−f will decrease to 0, implying E[Ii¯(z)]→0 (see Lemma 2). Hence, r̲>f/p must hold.Note that r̲ is unaffected by lender i’s monitoring efficiency (i.e., is independent of qi, ci, or si). The reason is that r̲ represents the entrepreneurial utility-maximizing way to allocate the project net value between an entrepreneur and her lender. Although parameters qi, ci, and si affect the project net value (i.e., the size of the pie), the utility-maximizing allocation rule (i.e., the sharing of the pie) is independent of them.When k is higher, the potential marginal private benefit B̃(z) is more likely to be high. In this case, entrepreneurs’ moral hazard problem is expected to be more severe, generating a higher need for lenders’ monitoring to alleviate the problem. This means that a lender’s expected credit limit will be very low if its skin in the game – which determines the lender’s monitoring incentive – is small. As a result, allocating a higher share of the pie to lenders (i.e., raising their monitoring incentives) is aligned with entrepreneurs’ interests, leading to a higher best loan rate r̲.In a competition of the Bertrand type, lender i’s loan rate is always within the interval [r̲,R]. If ri(z)<r̲, decreasing ri(z) hurts the lender without increasing its attractiveness, so neither lender will offer a loan rate below r̲. In the interval [r̲,R], increasing ri(z) implies a higher lender i’s profit at z, but it implies lower entrepreneurial utility, thereby reducing the lender’s attractiveness in the competition.Equilibrium loan rates. We posit some standard assumptions in our Bertrand competition model. (i) When U(q1,c1,z,r1(z))=U(q2,c2,1−z,r2(z)) holds, we assume that the entrepreneur at z will approach the lender that can potentially provide a higher maximum expected entrepreneurial utility (i.e., will approach lender 1 if U(q1,c1,z,r̲)>U(q2,c2,1−z,r̲)).23 (ii) If both U(q1,c1,z,r1(z))=U(q2,c2,1−z,r2(z)) and U(q1,c1,z,r̲)=U(q2,c2,1−z,r̲) hold, then we assume the entrepreneur will randomly approach a lender with probability 1/2; different entrepreneurs’ random choices are independent.Using Lemmas 1 to 3, we can solve for lenders’ equilibrium loan rates. If lender 1 wants to attract the entrepreneur at z, it must offer a loan rate weakly more attractive than the best loan rate r̲ of lender 2 (i.e., ensure U(q1,c1,z,r1(z))≥U(q2,c2,1−z,r̲)). If lender 1 cannot do so, then the entrepreneur will be served by lender 2 instead. Reasoning in this way yields the equilibrium loan rates in Proposition 1.24Proposition 1Let x̃≡1−c1/c2+c1q2/c2c1q2/c2+q1.When 0<x̃<1, there exists a unique equilibrium in which entrepreneurs located in 0,x̃ (resp. x̃,1) are served by lender 1 (resp. lender 2). At z=x̃, the entrepreneur is served by lender i∈{1,2} with probability 1/2. At z∈0,x̃, lender 1’s equilibrium loan rate schedule, r1∗(z), is the unique solution (in interval [r̲,R]) of (11)U(q1,c1,z,r1∗(z))︸entrepreneurial utility provided byr1∗z=U(q2,c2,1−z,r̲)︸maximum utility lender 2 provides.At z∈x̃,1, lender 2’s equilibrium loan rate schedule r2∗(z) is determined in a symmetric way.Proposition 1 shows the existence and uniqueness of the equilibrium. The restriction 0<x̃<1 guarantees that both lenders can attract a positive mass of entrepreneurs in equilibrium. If this restriction does not hold (which occurs when the difference between the two lenders’ IT is sufficiently large), then one lender will drive the other lender out; in this case, lenders’ pricing policy displayed in Proposition 1 is still robust for the dominant lender.25 For convenience, we focus on the case 0<x̃<1 for the rest of the paper.Proposition 1 implies that lender–borrower distance matters for lending if qi>0 holds for some i (i.e., if distance friction exists in the market). Attracting an entrepreneur will be harder for a lender if the entrepreneur is located farther away because then the lender’s relative cost advantage in monitoring is smaller. As a result, lender 1 (resp. lender 2) can originate loans only in the region [0,x̃] (resp. [x̃,0]), and so must give up entrepreneurs who are sufficiently distant. The location z=x̃ is the indifference location where neither lender has a cost advantage in monitoring, that is: (1−q1x̃)/c1=(1−q2(1−x̃))/c2. The two lenders offer the same maximum utility at this location, and the entrepreneur randomly chooses a lender with a probability of 1/2. Note that x̃ is decreasing in q1 and c1; this means lender 1 can reach farther locations if its information technology develops. This result is consistent with Ahnert et al. (2024) who document that small business lending by banks with higher IT adoption is less affected by bank–borrower distance.Next, we characterize lenders’ pricing strategies.Corollary 1Let qi>0 for some i∈{1,2} and z∈[0,x̃]. Lender 1’s equilibrium loan rate r1∗(z) is decreasing in z. A symmetric result holds for r2∗(z) at z∈[x̃,1]. At the indifference location z=x̃, r1∗(z)=r2∗(z)=r̲ holds.With distance friction (i.e., qi>0 for some i∈{1,2}), the schedule r1∗(z) displays a “perverse” pattern (see Panel 1 of Fig. 3): As lender 1’s monitoring efficiency goes down (i.e., as an entrepreneur is farther away), the loan rate offered to that entrepreneur decreases. Such a pattern results from the optimal pricing strategy of lender 1 at z∈[0,x̃]: maximizing the lender’s profit while ensuring that entrepreneurial utility is no less than the maximum utility the rival can provide. Based on this strategy, at z∈[0,x̃] the entrepreneurial utility implied by lender 1’s equilibrium loan rate r1∗(z) should exactly match the maximum utility U(q2,c2,1−z,r̲) lender 2 can provide.As z increases in the region [0,x̃], lender 1’s monitoring efficiency decreases relative to lender 2’s. Hence, lender 1 must offer a lower r1∗(z) to match the maximum utility provided by lender 2, implying the perverse loan rate pattern. The implication of the result is that entrepreneurs in the region [0,x̃] cannot benefit from lender 1’s advantageous monitoring efficiency; instead, lender 1 itself extracts the entire benefit of its IT advantage over lender 2. Corollary 1 is consistent with the findings of Herpfer et al. (2022): a bank will charge its borrowers higher loan rates if the borrowers geographically get closer to the bank or/and farther away from competing banks.At the indifference location z=x̃, neither lender has a cost advantage in monitoring, so the intensity of lender competition is maximal there. Therefore, a lender must offer its best loan rate r̲ to match the utility provided by the rival lender. Panel 1 of Fig. 3 graphically illustrates lenders’ equilibrium rates when qi>0.The case with no distance friction (q1=q2=0). If c1=c2 holds, the two lenders have the same monitoring efficiency at all locations, meaning that competition intensity is unboundedly high everywhere. In this case, every location is an indifference location with both lenders offering the best loan rate r̲, and, by assumption, every entrepreneur will randomly choose a lender with probability 1/2. Then, each lender can obtain half of the market, which is consistent with the limit by letting q1=q2 tend to 0. Note that in this case, r1∗(z)=r2∗(z)=r̲ is also consistent with the pricing strategies displayed in Proposition 1.26Download: Download high-res image (143KB)Download: Download full-size imageFig. 3. Equilibrium loan rates and expected loan volumes for different locations. This figure plots the equilibrium loan rate and expected loan volume against the entrepreneurial location. The parameter values are R=2.4, B=0.9, b=0.4, k=0.5, p=0.5, f=1, c1=1, c2=1, q1=0.6, and q2=0.6.Investment. The investment Ii(z) of the entrepreneur at z is random and depends on B̃(z). However, the randomness will disappear if we average the investment of a positive mass of entrepreneurs, in which case the expected investment E[Ii(z)] at z (based on the distribution of B̃(z)) matters. The following corollary characterizes how E[Ii(z)] varies with location.Corollary 2Let qi>0 for some i∈{1,2} and z∈[0,x̃]. The entrepreneur’s expected investment E[I1(z)] – which equals E[I1¯(z)] – is decreasing in z when z is sufficiently close to x̃. A symmetric result holds for E[I2(z)] at z∈[x̃,1].As z increases in the region [0,x̃], several competing effects work on lender 1’s credit limit and hence expected entrepreneurial investment. First, if q1>0, the direct effect of increasing z is to decrease lender 1’s monitoring efficiency (because of the longer lending distance), which tends to reduce E[I1(z)]. Second, the indirect effect is that r1∗(z) decreases (see Corollary 1), which in general has an ambiguous effect on E[I1(z)]. On the one hand, a lower r1∗(z) increases the entrepreneur’s skin in the game, making the moral hazard problem less severe and hence tending to increase E[I1(z)]; on the other hand, it reduces lender 1’s skin in the game and monitoring incentive, tending to decrease E[I1(z)]. When z is close to x̃, lender competition is very intense (i.e., r1∗(z) is very close to r̲), so the dominant effect of decreasing r1∗(z) is to reduce lender 1’s monitoring incentive, which, together with the direct effect, leads to a lower E[I1(z)]. Panel 2 of Fig. 3 illustrates the result.27
4. Information technology and lender competition: In this section, we first derive comparative statics of monitoring parameters on loan rates, lending volumes, and lender profits. Then, we study the competition between a fintech and a bank.4.1. Comparative statics of monitoring parametersWe analyze the comparative statics of (a) an individual lender’s (e.g., lender i’s) IT and (b) the lending sector’s IT, with a focus on the latter. Table 2 summarizes the results. When looking at the lending sector (instead of an individual lender), we let c1=c2=c and q1=q2=q hold and use q and c to represent the sector’s IT-distance and IT-basic, respectively.Information technology and loan rates. The following corollary analyzes how equilibrium loan rates vary with c and q (the lending sector’s IT) in the case c1=c2=c and q1=q2=q.Table 2. Summary of comparative statics. This table summarizes how endogenous variables (in the first column) is affected by parameters (in the first row). “↑” (resp. “↓”) means that an endogenous variable is increasing (resp. decreasing) in the corresponding parameter. “- -” means that an endogenous variable is independent of the corresponding parameter. “↑num” (resp. “↓num”) means that an endogenous variable is increasing (resp. decreasing) in the corresponding parameter based on numerical studies. “Hump-shaped” means the effect of a parameter increase has a “positive-then-negative” effect on the endogenous variable.Empty Cellq1c1q2c2q (qi=q, ci=c)c (qi=q, ci=c)r1∗(z) at z∈[0,x̃)↓↓↑↑↑- -∫0x̃I1(z)dz↓↓↑num↑numhump-shaped↓∫0x̃π1(z)dz↓↓↑↑↑num↓Corollary 3Let c1=c2=c and q1=q2=q. Lender i’s equilibrium loan rate ri∗(z) is increasing in q (except for z=1/2 where ri∗(z)=r̲) and is not affected by c. If q=0, ri∗(z)=r̲ holds for all locations.Corollary 3 highlights a crucial difference between c (IT-basic) and q (IT-distance). As q increases, monitoring costs become more sensitive to distance, which increases lender differentiation. Higher differentiation increases lender 1’s market power at z∈[0,1/2) because lender 2’s monitoring efficiency is more severely hurt by a higher q at a location closer to lender 1. A symmetric reasoning applies to lender 2 at z∈(1/2,1]. Hence, both lenders can post higher loan rates for their respective entrepreneurs as q increases. Lender differentiation will disappear when q=0, implying unbounded competition intensity and ri∗(z)=r̲ at all locations.28 In contrast, although an increase in c makes monitoring more costly, lenders’ differentiation is unaffected; hence, equilibrium loan rates are unaffected.In sum: unlike increasing c, increasing q not only makes monitoring more costly but also increases lenders’ differentiation, and the latter effect renders lender competition less intense. This result is consistent with D’Andrea et al. (2021) who find that broadband internet implementation intensifies bank competition and reduces banks’ loan price, and Duquerroy et al. (2022) who document that increased branch specialization in SME lending – which can be viewed as an increase in q – substantially curtails the intensity of lending competition.29 Paravisini et al. (2023) find a similar result in the credit market for export-related loans.Corollary 3 tells us that, when studying how changes in information technology affect lender competition, we should first specify the type of IT change.30The equilibrium consequences of a lender’s IT improvement are quite different from those of a general lending sector’s IT improvement. Indeed, a lender adopting better IT increases its loan rates (see the effects of q1 and c1 on r1∗(z) in Table 2), while both lenders’ loan rates will decrease if the lending sector’s IT-distance improves. A lender’s IT improvement affects both itself and the other lender’s behavior, giving rise to a competitive spillover effect. Our model highlights that caution is necessary when using diff-in-diff methods in empirical research on technological progress.31Download: Download high-res image (118KB)Download: Download full-size imageFig. 4. Information technology and total investment. This figure plots entrepreneurs’ total investment (i.e., lenders’ total loan volume) against c and q. The parameter values are: R=2.4, B=0.9, b=0.4, p=0.5, and f=1 in both panels; c=1 in Panel 1, with k=0.1 for the solid curve and k=0.8 for the dashed curve; q=0.6 and k=0.1 in Panel 2 .Information technology and lending volume. Lender 1’s (resp. lender 2’s) aggregate loan volume equals L1≡∫0x̃I1(z)dz (resp. L2≡∫x̃1I2(z)dz). Although Ii(z) is random, the aggregate lending volume Li depends on E[Ii(z)] and is deterministic (e.g., ∫0x̃I1(z)dz=∫0x̃E[I1(z)]dz) because B̃(z) is independent across z. The following proposition shows how the lending sector’s IT affects lenders’ total lending volume L1+L2, which is also entrepreneurs’ total investment.Proposition 2Let c1=c2=c and q1=q2=q. Entrepreneurs’ total investment (i.e., L1+L2) is decreasing in c while it is increasing in q if q is sufficiently small.Proposition 2 states that the two types of IT have different effects on the market’s credit supply. IT-basic progress (i.e., decreasing c) increases lenders’ lending volume and, hence, total investment because it improves lenders’ monitoring efficiency without intensifying their competition. See Panel 2 of Fig. 4 for an illustration. This is consistent with Ahnert et al. (2024) who find that job creation by young enterprises, which is an indirect measure of entrepreneurial investment, is higher in US counties that are more exposed to IT-intensive banks.A decrease in q (IT-distance progress) has more complex effects. First, it improves lenders’ monitoring efficiency (as IT-basic does), which tends to increase total investment. Second, it reduces lenders’ differentiation and intensifies their competition, decreasing lenders’ loan rates and generating an ambiguous effect on lenders’ expected credit limits. When q is sufficiently small, lenders’ loan rates will approach r̲; in this case, the dominant effect of lowering lenders’ loan rates is to decrease their monitoring incentives and expected credit limits. In addition, the speed of loan rate reduction will be unboundedly high when q is close to 0 because then the intensity of lender competition will tend to infinity (i.e., lender differentiation will disappear). As a result, when q is very small, lenders’ total lending volume will decrease as IT-distance improves, although monitoring becomes cheaper.Fig. 4 illustrates Proposition 2. Decreasing c has no differentiation effect and hence increases total investment unambiguously. Decreasing q, however, has a “hump-shaped” net effect on investment (see Panel 1 of Fig. 4). When q is large, the investment-spurring effects of decreasing q are dominant: (a) monitoring becomes cheaper, and (b) lower loan rates increase entrepreneurs’ skin in the game, reducing the severity of the moral hazard. However, when q is small, the dominant effect of decreasing q is reducing lenders’ monitoring incentives, thereby decreasing total investment. This result is consistent with Di Patti and Dell’Ariccia (2004), who document that the relationship between bank competition – which is affected by q in our model – and banks’ credit supply is hump-shaped.Furthermore, a numerical study finds that increasing k will increase the investment-maximizing level of q. This can be seen from Panel 1 of Fig. 4: The solid curve (with a low k) peaks at a lower q than the dashed curve (with a high k). This is so since a higher k implies a higher ex-ante severity of entrepreneurs’ moral hazard, which increases the need for monitoring to alleviate the problem and make credit available. Therefore, the provision of monitoring incentives (determined by lenders’ skin in the game) becomes more important to credit supply and investment.32 Hence, the differentiation effect of decreasing q is more likely to reduce total investment when k is higher.Information technology and lender profit. Lender 1’s aggregate lending profit from all locations is equal to ∫0x̃π1(z)dz; here π1(z) is lender 1’s profit from financing the entrepreneur at z (see Eq. (8)). Symmetrically, we can define lender 2’s aggregate profit. The effects of IT on lender profit are given in Table 2. Although a decrease in q (=q1=q2) implies cheaper monitoring, it also reduces lenders’ differentiation and intensifies their competition. Our numerical study finds that the differentiation effect dominates and decreases lender profit. In contrast, a decrease in c (=c1=c2) has no differentiation effect and increases lender profit.The effects of an individual lender’s IT. Table 2 also shows the effects of qi and ci (without the restriction q1=q2=q or c1=c2=c). As lender i’s IT improves – be it IT-basic (ci) or IT-distance (qi) – the lender will have a higher competitive advantage and obtain larger market share, which increases the lender’s loan rates, aggregate lending volume, and profit. Meanwhile, higher lender i’s competitiveness will force its rival to lower loan rates, lose market share, and make less profit.4.2. Competition between a bank and a fintechThe difference between a traditional bank and a fintech lender can be reflected in parameters qi and ci. Compared with banks, fintechs tend to have better IT-distance (i.e., lower qi) since they connect digitally with entrepreneurs and process information with automatic algorithms. In contrast, banks may have higher basic monitoring efficiency (i.e., lower ci) because they usually have better access to firm information.33Download: Download high-res image (402KB)Download: Download full-size imageFig. 5. Equilibrium loan rates and volumes under bank-fintech competition. This figure plots the equilibrium loan rate and expected loan volume against the entrepreneurial location. In Panel 1, the parameter values are R=2.4, B=0.9, b=0.4, k=0.5, p=0.5, f=1, c1=1, c2=1.4, q1=0.6, and q2=0. In Panel 2, lender i’s marginal funding cost is fi (with i∈{1,2}); the parameter values are R=2.4, B=0.9, b=0.4, k=0.5, p=0.5, f1=1, f2=1.05, c1=1, c2=0.7, q1=0.6, and q2=0.Suppose that lender 1 is a bank with relatively low c1 (smaller than c2) and positive q1, while lender 2 is a fintech with relatively high c2 (because of lack of data) and q2=0 (uniform capability to monitor different entrepreneurs). Then, according to Corollary 1, the fintech’s loan rate is decreasing in its lending distance (i.e., increasing in z when z∈[x̃,1], see Panel 1 of Fig. 5). The reason is that the maximum utility provided by the bank (i.e., lender 1) is decreasing in z; to match this utility, the fintech will increase its loan rate as z increases in the region [x̃,1]. This result is consistent with Butler et al. (2017), who document that borrowers with better access to bank financing request loans at lower interest rates on a fintech platform.34 Moreover, note that c1<c2 must imply x̃>0, no matter how large the bank’s q1 is. The reason is that the bank, with its better access to firm information (which leads to c1<c2), can ensure that it has higher monitoring efficiency than the fintech when z is sufficiently close to 0. The implication is that although fintechs, with their advantage in IT-distance, can bring competitive pressure to banks, the latter will not be completely replaced because of their superior capability of serving certain types of firms.Heterogeneous funding costs. Banks and fintechs have different funding sources and, hence, may face heterogeneous funding costs. In Appendix B, we relax the assumption that the two lenders face the same marginal funding cost f. We find that decreasing a lender’s funding cost will increase the lender’s skin in the game and expected credit limit, improving its competitive advantage. As a result, the lender gains a larger market area (Corollary 5) and increases loan rates and expected loan volumes (Corollary 6). However, if both lenders’ funding costs decrease, their loan rates will decrease (Corollary 7). It follows that if a policymaker aims to decrease loan rates by reducing lenders’ funding costs, it should reduce the funding costs for all lenders. Otherwise, some lenders can exploit larger funding cost advantages and charge higher loan rates.With heterogeneous funding costs, lenders’ best loan rates are no longer the same: The lender with a lower marginal funding cost has a lower best loan rate (Lemma 4). Suppose that lender 1 is a bank with a lower marginal funding cost than lender 2 (fintech). At the indifference location z=x̃, the two lenders offer the same entrepreneurial utility, but they have different advantages: The bank has an advantage in funding costs, while the fintech has an advantage in IT. As a result, the equilibrium loan rates and expected volumes are discontinuous at the indifference location (Proposition 6). The bank’s funding cost advantage allows it to offer a lower (best) loan rate at z=x̃, while the fintech’s IT advantage allows it to provide a higher expected credit limit to compete with the bank (see Panel 2 of Fig. 5).Download: Download high-res image (377KB)Download: Download full-size imageFig. 6. Social welfare and lending sector’s information technology. This figure plots social welfare, entrepreneurial utility, and lenders’ profits against c and q. The parameter values are: R=2.4, B=0.9, b=0.4, p=0.5 and f=1 in all panels; c=1 in Panels 1 and 3; q=0.4 in Panels 2 and 4; k=0.1 in Panels 1 and 2; and k=0.9 in Panels 3 and 4.
5. Welfare analysis: In this section, we first analyze how the development and diffusion of the lending sector’s information technology affect social welfare. Then, we examine the relationship between equilibrium loan rates and socially optimal ones. Throughout the section, we let q1=q2=q and c1=c2=c, and hence use q and c to represent the lending sector’s IT-distance and IT-basic.If the entrepreneur at location z is financed by lender i (with i∈{1,2}), then social welfare is given by (12)W≡∫01IizpR−ri(z)dz︸Entrepreneurs’ aggregate utility+∫01Iizpri(z)−f−c(mi(z))22(1−qsi)dz︸Lenders’ total profits. Here ri(z), mi(z), and Ii(z) are lender i’s loan rate, monitoring intensity, and credit limit (i.e., loan volume) for the entrepreneur at z respectively. Even if Ii(z) and mi(z) are functions of B̃(z), W is deterministic since B̃(z) is independent across z. According to Expression (12), social welfare consists of entrepreneurs’ utility and lenders’ profits, incorporating that lenders’ monitoring prevents entrepreneurs’ shirking.5.1. Welfare properties of the symmetric equilibriumIn this subsection, we analyze the welfare effects of information technology progress. Fig. 6 shows how entrepreneurs’ utility, lenders’ profits, and social welfare vary with q and c. A decrease in q will increase the intensity of lending competition because differentiation will be diminished (Corollary 3). Greater lender competition (together with higher monitoring efficiency) translates into lenders providing higher entrepreneurial utility. So, as can be seen in Panels 1 and 3 of Fig. 6, entrepreneurial utility increases if q decreases. From the lenders’ perspective, reducing q has two opposing effects: a cost-saving effect since monitoring is cheaper and a differentiation effect, which implies more intense competition. Our numerical study finds that the differentiation effect dominates, so lenders’ profits decrease as q decreases (see Table 2). Perhaps more surprising is the following result: decreasing q reduces social welfare for q small enough.Proposition 3Social welfare is increasing in q if q is sufficiently small while it is decreasing in c.In general, the effect of q on welfare is ambiguous. Whether a reduction in q and the resultant increased competition intensity are welfare-improving depends on whether we start with a low or high level of competition (Panels 1 and 3 of Fig. 6). When q is high, reducing q improves welfare for two reasons: First, a lower q implies higher monitoring efficiency in the lending sector (cost-saving effect). Second, when lender differentiation is high, intensifying lender competition will significantly alleviate entrepreneurs’ moral hazard and increase their investment (see Panel 1 of Fig. 4). A potential welfare-reducing effect also exists: More intense lender competition reduces lenders’ skin in the game and monitoring incentives. However, the last effect is dominated when q is high.The story flips when q is small enough. In this case, high competition intensity leaves lenders with very low skin in the game. Then, further decreasing q reduces social welfare because the reduction in lenders’ monitoring incentives – which decreases their willingness to alleviate entrepreneurs’ moral hazard and extend credit limits – becomes the dominant effect. Entrepreneurs’ investment rapidly decreases as a result. More intense lender competition still improves entrepreneurs’ utility (by decreasing the loan rates). In addition, the cost-saving effect is dominated.35In contrast, decreasing c unambiguously improves social welfare since it does not affect lender differentiation (Corollary 3). See Panels 2 and 4 of Fig. 6 for an illustration.Furthermore, a numerical study finds that increasing k, the probability of a high realization of B̃(z), will increase the welfare-maximizing level of q. This can be seen from Panels 1 and 3 of Fig. 6: In Panel 3, where k is higher, social welfare peaks at a higher q than in Panel 1. A higher k (i.e., higher ex-ante severity of moral hazard) raises the need for monitoring, increasing the importance of lenders’ monitoring incentives and their skin in the game for welfare. As a result, IT-distance progress is more likely to reduce social welfare when B̃(z) is more likely to be high.In short, although reducing q (i.e., improving IT-distance) and reducing c (i.e., improving IT-basic) can each be viewed as progress in information technology, their welfare effects are quite different. Hence, when discussing IT progress, one must stipulate the type of IT involved.Key model ingredients, competition, and welfare. The result that reducing distance friction may harm welfare is driven by two ingredients: (a) lender monitoring matters for welfare, and (b) lenders cannot commit ex ante to monitoring effort (they set credit limits and monitoring intensities after entrepreneurs have chosen lenders). Note that credit limits determine the need for monitoring (Lemma 1). The second ingredient implies that monitoring is not committed when lenders post loan rates; instead, it is incentivized by lenders’ skin in the game determined by loan rate competition. As a result, reducing q (when it is already very low) will excessively intensify competition and reduce lenders’ monitoring incentives, which hurts welfare because of ingredient (a).36Endogenous lender locations. In Online Appendix C, we allow lenders to choose their locations before lending competition happens. We find that when q>0, lenders choose different locations, implying the existence of lender differentiation. In addition, we find that lenders move closer to each other as q decreases, further reducing lender differentiation (without bringing a cost-saving effect). This additional differentiation effect (i.e., the diminishing distance between lenders) makes IT-distance progress more likely to cause excessive competition and harm welfare. In contrast, decreasing c does not affect lenders’ location choices, so it unambiguously improves welfare.5.2. Socially optimal loan ratesIn this subsection, we examine how IT affects the relationship between equilibrium loan rates and socially optimal ones.Social planner’s problem. We consider the case where the social planner, without observing B̃(z), can choose the socially optimal loan rate schedule of lender i, denoted by {rio(z)}, to maximize social welfare W. The other choice variables of lenders and entrepreneurs are determined in equilibrium for given loan rates; that is, each entrepreneur approaches the lender that can provide higher utility, and lenders’ monitoring and credit limits are determined as in Lemma 1, Lemma 2. Note that shirking is never desirable for the social planner since B̃(z)<f. The following proposition characterizes the socially optimal loan rates.Proposition 4Price discrimination is not efficient. At any location, the socially optimal loan rate for both lenders is ro, which is increasing in k and independent of q, c, and z, and satisfies r̲<ro<R. The entrepreneur at z∈[0,1/2) (resp. z∈(1/2,1]) approaches lender 1 (resp. lender 2); the entrepreneur at z=1/2 approaches lender i (with i∈{1,2}) with probability 1/2.From the social point of view, lowering ro decreases lenders’ skin in the game (i.e., reducing their monitoring incentives), potentially reducing their credit limits and hurting welfare. Yet as ro decreases, entrepreneurs’ skin in the game will increase, making moral hazard less severe and reducing the need for monitoring (Lemma 1), which tends to improve social welfare. The social planner must balance the social benefits (less severe moral hazard) and costs (lower monitoring incentive) of decreasing ro, leading to the relation r̲<ro<R: At one extreme, r̲ maximizes entrepreneurs’ utility but implies an excessively low lenders’ monitoring incentives (and also excessively low credit limits). The monopoly loan rate R is the other extreme, which maximizes lenders’ profits and the severity of the entrepreneurs’ moral hazard.As k increases, the ex-ante severity of entrepreneurs’ moral hazard problem becomes higher, increasing the need for lenders’ monitoring to alleviate the problem and make credit available. Therefore, the social planner will increase ro to give lenders higher monitoring incentives.Note that ro is unaffected by information technology (i.e., q or c) or the lending distance si. The reason is that ro controls the efficient relative size of lender profit with respect to entrepreneurial utility (i.e., the sharing of the pie), which is a trade-off between the severity of moral hazard and lenders’ monitoring incentives. Although q, c, and si determine the absolute project value (i.e., the size of the pie), the welfare-maximizing way to share the pie is independent of those parameters.Given that lenders offer ro, the entrepreneur at z∈[0,1/2) (resp. z∈(1/2,1]) approaches lender 1 (resp. lender 2), while the entrepreneur at z=1/2 randomizes her choice. Such choices of entrepreneurs are efficient for welfare since each location is served by the lender with (weakly) better monitoring efficiency. Note that at z=1/2, lender i’s equilibrium loan rate is lower than ro. This is so since the two lenders have the same monitoring efficiency at z=1/2, implying unbounded competition. As a result, the equilibrium loan rate at z=1/2 always equals the best loan rate r̲ (see Corollary 1), which is excessively low compared with the socially optimal level ro. See Panel 1 of Fig. 7 for an illustration.Equilibrium loan rates v.s. socially optimal rates. Proposition 4 implies that the “perverse” pattern of lender i’s equilibrium loan rate ri∗(z) (displayed in Corollary 1) is not efficient. A lender maximizes profit instead of social welfare, so it will extract more project value when it has more market power. Such a strategy does not balance the severity of moral hazard well with the lender’s monitoring incentive. In addition, if lenders offer ro, it is easy to show that lender i’s expected credit limit E[Ii¯(z)] is linearly increasing in (1−qsi)/c. This aligns with the welfare-maximizing consideration because a higher monitoring efficiency corresponds to a higher expected lending volume. In contrast, in equilibrium, decreasing q – which improves both lenders’ monitoring efficiency – may reduce their lending volumes (Proposition 2). A straightforward policy implication of Proposition 4 is that regulators can guide lenders’ pricing to improve allocation efficiency by setting ro as the reference loan rate for lenders and limiting their ability to price discriminate based on borrowers’ locations.Download: Download high-res image (163KB)Download: Download full-size imageFig. 7. Comparing r1∗(z) and ro. This figure plots r1∗(z) and ro against z (Panel 1) and q (Panel 2). The parameter values are: R=2.4, f=1, B=0.9, b=0.4, k=0.5, p=0.5 and c=1 in both panels; q=0.6 in Panel 1; z=0.1 in Panel 2.Remark Asymmetric ITIf the two lenders’ IT is asymmetric (i.e., q1≠q2 or/and c1≠c2), the socially optimal loan rate (of both lenders) is still equal to ro since ro is independent of lenders’ IT. Given that both lenders offer ro, entrepreneurs’ choices are still efficient from the social point of view: The entrepreneur at z will approach the lender with better IT at z, or randomize her choice if the two lenders have the same monitoring efficiency at z.For the rest of the section, we still focus on the case q1=q2=q and c1=c2=c. The following corollary shows how the lending sector’s IT affects the relationship between the equilibrium loan rates and the socially optimal one.Corollary 4When q is sufficiently small, ri∗(z)<ro holds for all locations.As q decreases, lender differentiation will be smaller. At any location served by lender i, the corresponding increase in competition intensity will gradually drive the equilibrium loan rate ri∗(z) to the best loan rate r̲, which is lower than the socially optimal level ro according to Proposition 4. As a result, ri∗(z)<ro holds for all locations when q is small enough; in this case, lenders’ monitoring incentives are excessively low for all entrepreneurs. See Panel 2 of Fig. 7 for an illustration.Corollary 4 provides an explanation for Proposition 3 from another angle. When q is small enough, equilibrium loan rates deviate below the socially optimal level at all locations. Then, further decreasing q enlarges the deviation, reducing social welfare.Fig. 8 illustrates the relationship between lender 1’s equilibrium loan rate and ro in z×q space. For all three panels, lender competition is excessively intense (i.e., r1∗(z)<ro holds) in Region II (the colored area). Consistent with our results, r1∗(z) is lower than ro when q is small or z is close to 1/2.A numerical study finds that as k increases, Region II will become larger in z×q space (Comparing the three panels of Fig. 8 for an illustration), which means IT-distance progress is more likely to induce excessive lender competition. The intuition is that increasing k will raise the need for monitoring, so lenders’ skin in the game (i.e., monitoring incentives) will be more important for welfare. Then, decreasing lender differentiation (through reducing q) can more easily induce ri∗(z)<ro.Download: Download high-res image (192KB)Download: Download full-size imageFig. 8. Relations between r1∗(z) and ro in z×q space. This figure compares r1∗(z) with ro in z×q space. The parameter values are R=2.4, c=1, f=1, B=0.9, b=0.4, and p=0.5 . (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)Regulator control of rates and credit limits. In Online Appendix D, we analyze the case where the social planner determines both loan rates and credit limits. We find that the social planner will choose r̲ – the best loan rate given in Lemma 3 – and set high credit limits. The social planner would like to alleviate entrepreneurs’ moral hazard using a low loan rate and increase total project values by setting high credit limits. In this case, the planner-chosen loan rate r̲, like ro, is independent of q, c, and si. However, the credit limit chosen by the social planner at z does depend on those parameters: It is linearly increasing in (1−qsi)/c – with si=z (resp. si=1−z) if i=1 (resp. i=2) – since the social planner would like lender i to provide more loans if its IT improves. Therefore, implementing the optimal regulator control of rates and credit limits requires the social planner to observe lenders’ IT at each location.
6. Conclusion: Our study shows that whether the development of information technology intensifies lender competition depends on its impact on differentiation. If IT progress in the lending sector is of type IT-basic – reducing the costs of monitoring an entrepreneur without altering lenders’ relative cost advantage (i.e., lower c) – then neither differentiation nor competition among lenders is affected; hence, lenders will be more profitable and provide more loans. Yet, if the industry’s IT progress is of type IT-distance – weakening the influence of lender–entrepreneur distance on monitoring costs (i.e., lower q) – then differentiation among lenders will decrease, competition will become more intense, and lenders may become less profitable. The effect of IT-distance progress on entrepreneurs’ total investment is hump-shaped (Proposition 2 and Fig. 4). IT-distance progress is more likely to reduce investment when the ex-ante severity of entrepreneurs’ moral hazard problem is higher (i.e., k is higher). Therefore, we should be careful to identify the kind of information technology change being considered before gauging its impact.Consistently with received empirical evidence, we have the testable implication that a technologically more advanced lender – regardless of how changes in IT affect lender differentiation – lends to more industries/locations, commands greater market power, and has a larger aggregate lending volume. We also find that a lender’s loan rate will increase after the lender’s IT improves relative to other lenders’. See Proposition 1, Corollary 1, and Table 2.The welfare effect of information technology progress is ambiguous when it is of type IT-distance. On the one hand, higher competition intensity and better IT always favor entrepreneurs and alleviate their moral hazard; on the other hand, lower lender differentiation can reduce lenders’ profits, monitoring incentives, and willingness to extend credit limits. Whether or not an improvement in lenders’ IT-distance benefits social welfare depends on whether the lending market has insufficient or too much competition at the outset. When q is low, there is always excessive competition and insufficient monitoring incentives (Proposition 3). IT-distance progress is more likely to induce excessive competition and harm welfare when the ex-ante severity of entrepreneurs’ moral hazard is higher (see Fig. 6, Fig. 8). The market may over- or under-shoot the welfare optimal rate. It will tend to under-shoot – implying that the market under-provides monitoring – when lender competition is very intense (Proposition 4 and its corollary). Finally, we find that price discrimination is inefficient and that a regulator could improve welfare by imposing a uniform reference loan rate.