TITLE:The Portfolio-Driven Disposition Effect
Abstract:  The disposition effect for a stock significantly weakens if the portfolio is at a gain, but is large when it is at a loss. We find this portfolio-driven disposition effect (PDDE) in four independent settings: U.S. and Chinese archival data, as well as U.S. and Chinese experiments. The PDDE is robust to a variety of controls in regression specifications and is not explained by extreme returns, portfolio rebalancing, tax considerations, or investor heterogeneity. Our evidence suggests that investors form mental frames at both the stock and the portfolio levels and that these frames combine to generate the PDDE.
introduction:   There is perhaps no morerobust trading phenomenon than the disposition effect, the pattern whereby investors are more likely to sell an asset when it is at a gain than when it is at a loss (Shefrin and Statman (1985)). The disposition effect has been documented among U.S. retail investors (Odean (1998)), foreign retail investors (Frydman and Wang (2020), Grinblatt and Keloharju (2001)), institutional investors (Shapira and Venezia (2001)), homeowners (Genesove and Mayer (2001)), and corporate executives (Heath, Huddart, and Lang (1999)), as well as in experimental settings (Weber and Camerer (1998), Frydman, Hartzmark, and Solomon (2018)).
  Standard explanations for the disposition effect—such as tax considerations, portfolio rebalancing, and informed trading—have been proposed and dismissed (Odean (1998)), leaving explanations that rely on investor preferences.1Models that attempt to explain the disposition effect often have investors with preferences over some subset of their wealth such as an individual stock, which Thaler et al. (1997) call “narrow framing.” For example, Barberis and Xiong (2009, 2012) and Ingersoll and Jin (2013) show that if an investor has preferences defined over realized stock-level gains and losses, she will predictably exhibit a disposition effect.
  While much of the empirical and theoretical work related to the disposition effect focuses on individual assets, most households hold a portfolio of assets. This paper then asks a simple question: does the disposition effect operate independently for each individual asset, or does it depend on the portfolio as a whole? In doing so, we ask the related question of whether investors have preferences over individual stocks, the portfolio as a whole, or both.
  Consider an investor with three stocks: X1, X2, and X3. The disposition effect says that Pr(Xiis sold | Xiis at a gain) > Pr(Xiis sold | Xiis at a loss) for alli. If the investor has preferences over each individual stock, then we would expect the three probabilistic statements to be independent of each other. However, if preferences depend in part on portfolio performance, then we would expect the disposition effect for Stock X1to depend on the state of the remaining portfolio (X2and X3).
  The latter is precisely what we find in the data. Whether we examine 78,000 households in the Barber and Odean (2000) data set, 97,000 investors in a Chinese brokerage data set, 2,300 U.S. participants in an Amazon Mechanical Turk (“MTurk”) trading game experiment, or 800 experimental participants at a Chinese university, the results consistently tell the same story: an investor's disposition effect is large when her portfolio is at a loss and significantly smaller when it is at a gain.
  To illustrate the main finding, consider the probability of selling a given stock among the four possible (Stock, Portfolio) conditions: (Gain, Gain), (Gain, Loss), (Loss, Gain), and (Loss, Loss). When we calculate simple univariate statistics for each of these conditions in the Barber and Odean data set, we find that the probabilities of selling in the (Gain, Gain) and (Loss, Gain) conditions are nearly equal: in other words, there is almost no disposition effect when the portfolio is at a gain. Given how pervasive the disposition effect is, it is surprising to find that the disposition effect largely disappears among the 61% of observations in the Barber and Odean (2000) data set in which portfolios are up.
  Because the existence of a disposition effect in the Barber and Odean data set is well-known, there must be a large effect among the remaining 39% of the data when portfolios are at a loss. This is precisely what we find: the probability of selling in the (Gain, Loss) condition is nearly twice as large as that of the (Loss, Loss) condition. We call this theportfolio-driven disposition effect(PDDE).
  We document this relationship between the performance of an investor's portfolio and her tendency to exhibit a disposition effect in both univariate analysis and hazard regressions with a host of controls. Perhaps the cleanest way to see our findings is via a matched-sample analysis. More specifically, we compare selling decisions across investors made on the same day for the same stock that was also purchased on the same day. In other words, our identification comes exclusively from the fact that different investors face different portfolio-level capital gains due to the other stocks in their portfolios. The results are very similar to those from the baseline analysis.
  The PDDE is not a repackaging of earlier research on the disposition effect. Specifically, we show that it is distinct from the rank effect documented by Hartzmark (2015), and it is not explained by tax considerations, portfolio rebalancing, or investor heterogeneity in the disposition effect.
  The evidence is most consistent with investors having at least two frames—one at the stock level and one at the portfolio level—when making their trading decisions. While prior research on the disposition effect has established narrow framing at the stock level, here we provide empirical evidence of an additional frame at the portfolio level that interacts with the stock-level frame, resulting in the PDDE. To do this, we exploit the fact that a focal asset's membership in a portfolio will be a function of how similar the other assets in the portfolio are. Similarity has long been thought to be a defining characteristic of how an individual creates her mental account (Goldstone (1994)). As Evers, Imas, and Kang (2022), Nosofsky (1986), Kruschke (1992) put it, “when outcomes are perceived to be similar, they are categorized together, assigned to the same mental account and evaluated jointly.” Thus, when considering focal Stock X, if investors frame at the portfolio level, then we should expect a stronger PDDE when defining a portfolio with assets most similar to Stock X. For example, consider an investor that owns three assets—Stock X, Stock Y, and a house. When considering focal Stock X, similarity would predict that Stock Y is more likely to be placed in the same mental account as Stock X, and thus will be more influential for the trading decisions of Stock X than the house.
  With this in mind, we perform two tests based on similarity. First, we exploit the fact that a single household can have multiple accounts from the same discount brokerage. Similarity would predict that two stocks in the same account are more likely to be considered in the same portfolio while two stocks from different accounts are less likely to be, even though all stocks in the brokerage accounts contribute to the household's wealth. We find evidence of PDDE moderation following dissimilarity: stocks held in the same account as the focal stock generate a PDDE that is 21% larger than that of stocks held by the same household but in a different account than the focal stock. This pattern is also robust to restricting attention to one-adult households, where the size of the effect is 28%.
  Second, rather than measure the similarity of stocks across brokerage accounts within the same household, we exploit the characteristics of the individual assets within a single brokerage account. Specifically, we sort investors’ assets into U.S. common stocks, foreign stocks, open-end mutual funds, options, and other stock-type securities (such as closed-end funds and preferred stock). When the focal stock is a U.S. common stock, the PDDE shrinks as the source of the portfolio capital gain bears less resemblance to U.S. common stocks. For example, the moderating effect of one unit of capital gains generated by other U.S. common stocks in the portfolio is 2.7 times as large as that of foreign stocks, 3.2 times as large as that of other stock-type securities, and 3.6 times as large as that of mutual funds. In other words, as a stock in the portfolio looks less similar to the focal stock, its contribution to the PDDE declines.
  The PDDE has important downstream consequences for aggregate behavior, prices, and investor welfare. When aggregate market indices rise (fall), a greater fraction of investors will have portfolios at a gain (loss), and so the PDDE predicts aggregate countercyclicality in the disposition effect. We confirm this in both the U.S. and Chinese brokerage data: following a bull market, the disposition effect falls, but following a bear market, it rises. Our evidence supports the view that investors engage in more heuristic-like behavior in bad times (Mullainathan and Shafir (2013), Schilbach, Schofield, and Mullainathan (2016)).
  Our evidence that investors frame at both the individual stock and portfolio level has the potential to explain stock return patterns that existing single-frame models of investor behavior have difficulty predicting. For example, Barberis and Huang (2001) develop two models of framing, one in which investors frame at the individual stock level and another in which they frame at the total portfolio level. Each of their models can explain some well-known empirical patterns. They conclude that a superior model of investor behavior would include both stock-level framing and broader forms of framing.2Our evidence on the PDDE indicates that investors do indeed frame at both the stock and the portfolio levels.
  Our paper is organized as follows. We describe our data and methodology in SectionI. In SectionII, we introduce the PDDE and show that it is a robust phenomenon. In SectionIII, we show that the PDDE is not explained by prior research. SectionIVprovides direct evidence of a multiple-frame explanation for the PDDE. SectionVconcludes.

I. Data and Methodology:   We begin with the large U.S. discount broker data set used by Barber and Odean (2000). The raw data include trading activity for roughly 78,000 households with roughly 158,000 accounts between January 1991 and November 1996. Following Odean (1998), we restrict our main analyses to U.S. common stocks because the price data needed for this study are not available at a daily frequency for many other asset classes, and stock transactions account for more than half of all the transactions in the data set.
  The unit of observation is an account-stock-day triple. Following Seru, Shumway, and Stoffman (2010), we count every purchase of a stock as the beginning of a new position, and a position ends on the date the investor first sells part or all of her holdings.3Given that we have approximately 104,000 accounts that hold common stock, with an average of 3.5 stocks per account over the 1,497 trading days in our sample, we begin with approximately 545 million potential observations. Following Ben-David and Hirshleifer (2012), we filter the raw data set and make several simplifying assumptions. First, we include only securities that are identified as common shares and appear in the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP). Because prices in the discount brokerage data set are not adjusted for splits and dividends, we rely on CRSP factor adjustments to account for these issues. Second, we remove any account-stocks with negative commissions since they may correspond to a reverse transaction. Third, account-stocks that include short-sale transactions are removed to avoid any misrepresentation in the value-weighted average price (VWAP) of portfolio holdings. Fourth, we exclude positions for which we do not have information on the purchase price, which primarily arise if investors purchased stocks before the start of our sample period. Finally, since our primary question of interest is the effect of portfolio performance on investor behavior, we only retain account-days with at least two common stock holdings. After applying these filters, we are left with a data set of 110,554,055 (account, stock, and day) observations. We report summary statistics in Panel A of TableI.
  We have a similar brokerage data set from China that begins in 2000 and ends in 2009.4This data set comes from a brokerage company that has multiple branches throughout China and serves approximately half a million investors. To make the analysis computationally feasible, we focus on a randomly selected 20% of the investors.5
  As with the U.S. data, we restrict our analyses to common stocks and calculate holding-period returns after adjusting for stock splits and dividends. Information on stock prices and distribution comes from the China Stock Market and Accounting Research Database (CSMAR). After excluding positions for which we do not have information on the purchase price and excluding account-days for which investors hold only one stock, the resulting data set contains 97,000 unique investors and 84,793,767 (account, stock, and day) observations. We report summary statistics for this sample in Panel B of TableI. Note that the Chinese investors trade much more frequently than the U.S. investors—their daily selling probability ranges from 1.8% to 8.7%, depending on the status of the focal stock and the portfolio, while these numbers for the U.S. investors are between 0.2% and 0.4%.
  The variablePortfolio Gainis a dummy indicating whether the investor's stock portfolio is at a gain or a loss. We compute this variable by first summing up the gains/losses (in dollars) of the investor's positions in all of her stocks as of the given day.7
  Our main coefficient of interest in equation (2) isβ3, the coefficient on the interaction term, which represents the ratio difference in disposition effects for paper gain portfolios and paper loss portfolios. In equation (2), exp(β1) measures the disposition effect for paper loss portfolios, while exp(β1+β3) measures the disposition effect for paper gain portfolios.
  Compared to the linear probability model, which essentially estimates the disposition effect as the difference between the probability of selling winners and losers, the hazard model measures the disposition effect as the ratio of the two. This feature of the Cox (1972) proportional hazard model fits our research purpose particularly well: because investors typically increase trading activity after positive portfolio performance (e.g., Ben-David, Birru, and Prokopenya (2018), Gervais and Odean (2001)), the difference between the probability of selling winners and that of selling losers should mechanically change, while the ratio of the two should be immune to the change of turnover (Feng and Seasholes (2005)).
  There are two ways to control for unobservable heterogeneity in the Cox proportional hazard model: fixed effects and stratification. The fixed-effects model assumes that the hazard rates between different groups are proportional, and it can be estimated by adding dummy variables to the right-hand side of equation (2). However, the shortcoming is that it is difficult to incorporate a large number of fixed effects because the maximum likelihood estimator can suffer from the incidental parameters problem (Lancaster (2000)). The stratification method avoids the incidental parameters problem, and it relaxes the proportional hazard rate assumption of the fixed-effect method and allows for different baseline hazards between the strata. In other words, with stratification, the baseline hazard function ofh0(t)${{h}_0}( t )$is allowed to vary across strata. Because of its flexibility, we use stratification to account for unobservable heterogeneity.8

II. The PDDE:   The PDDE can be illustrated by a simple figure.
  We examine the U.S. and Chinese brokerage samples in Panels A and B, respectively. The univariate view of the PDDE is strong in both samples.
  Consider the probability that an investor sells one of her holdings, plotted in the portion of Figure1labeled “All Portfolios.” The disposition effect can be seen as the difference between the green (probability of selling a gain) and the red (probability of selling a loss) bars. The black bars (which represent all stocks) are included to show the weighted average. In Panel A, the unconditional probability of selling a given stock is approximately 0.24%. Adding the condition that a given stock's return is positive (the green bar) increases the probability of an investor selling to 0.27%. The ratio (difference) in the probability of selling a gain versus a loss is approximately 1.42 (8 basis points). In other words, an investor is approximately 42% (0.27%/0.19% − 1) more likely to sell a gain than a loss. This is the disposition effect.
  To illustrate the PDDE, we reproduce these probabilities for two different scenarios: (i) the investor's portfolio is at a gain (the portion labeled “> 0”), and (ii) the investor's portfolio is at a loss (the portion labeled “≤$ \le $0”). The PDDE refers to the fact that the disposition effect is much stronger in the scenario where the investor's portfolio is at a loss compared to when her portfolio is at a gain. In fact, in the U.S. sample, the disposition effect ratio (difference) decreases to approximately 1.21 (4 basis points) for gain portfolios. Conversely, the disposition effect grows substantially when the sample is restricted to observations for which the portfolio is at a paper loss, resulting in a disposition effect ratio (difference) of approximately 2.14 (21 basis points). These disposition effect ratios reveal that when an investor's portfolio is at a paper loss (gain), she is 114% (21%) more likely to sell a gain than a loss.
  As we mention above, the investors in our Chinese sample trade much more frequently: the unconditional probability of selling a given stock is approximately 3.62%, which is more than 15 times the probability in the U.S. sample (Figure1, Panel B). Nevertheless, the ratio (difference) in the probability of selling a gain versus a loss is approximately 3.73 (5.77%) for Chinese investors. In other words, an investor is approximately 273% (7.88%/2.11% − 1) more likely to sell a gain than a loss, indicating a strong disposition effect in the Chinese data. The PDDE is also strong in the Chinese sample: the disposition effect ratio (difference) decreases to approximately 1.73 (3.69%) for gain portfolios and grows to approximately 3.56 (4.71%) for loss portfolios. These disposition effect ratios reveal that when an investor's portfolio is at a paper loss (gain), she is 256% (73%) more likely to sell a gain than a loss.
  We estimate equation (2) on the U.S. (Chinese) sample described in SectionIusing a Cox hazard model and report the results in TableII, Panel A (Panel B). Column (1) shows the baseline results with no stratification. Columns (2) to (4) add stratification by date, stock, and account, respectively. In column (5), we control for the V-shaped disposition effect (Ben-David and Hirshleifer (2012)) by including 52 return bracket indicators for the focal stock's return: (−∞, −50%), …, [−4%, −2%), [−2%, 0), [0, 2%), [2%, 4%), …, [50%, +∞). In addition, one might be concerned that the variablesGainandPortfolio Gainare mechanically related, and thus, in column (6), we consider an alternative definition forPortfolio Gainthat excludes the focal stock when computing portfolio performance. We also consider other alternative definitions ofPortfolio Gainsuch as the fraction of stocks in the portfolio that are at a gain. The results, reported in TableA4of theInternet Appendix, are similar to those for our main specification.9
  Across all specifications, the coefficient on the interaction term (Gain*Portfolio Gain) ranges from −0.58 to −0.86 in the U.S. data and from −0.15 to −0.44 in the Chinese data. These coefficients indicate significant declines in the disposition effect when the portfolio is at a gain relative to when the portfolio is at a loss. For example, in our preferred specification with account stratification (column (4)), the coefficient onGainindicates the ratio of proportion of gains realized (PGR) to proportion of losses realized (PLR) is 2.64 (= e0.970) when the portfolio is at a loss. When the portfolio is at a gain, PGR/PLR decreases to 1.17 (= e0.970−0.809). In the same specification of the Chinese data, PGR/PLR decreases from 2.11 for a losing portfolio to 1.36 for a winning portfolio. Moreover, these estimates are highly statistically significant, witht-statistics all greater than 29. Taken together, these results suggest that the PDDE illustrated in Figure1is unlikely to be explained by unobservable investor, time, or stock characteristics that affect investors’ propensity to sell shares of stock.10Given that the account stratification gives a significantly better model fit (as reflected by the pseudoR2) than stock or date stratification, we use it as our preferred stratification and report most of the remaining analyses using this specification.
  Next, we consider more continuous measures of the focal stock and the overall portfolio's performance. In Figure2, we display a heatmap of hazard regression coefficients indicating relative selling probabilities as a function of the performance of the focal stock and the total portfolio. Specifically, we sort all observations into 12-by-12 boxes by the focal stock's holding-period returns and total portfolio returns. Rows indicate different portfolio return brackets, and columns indicate different stock return brackets. The dependent variable is a dummy variable that equals one if there is sale (including partial sale) on dayt+ 1, and zero otherwise. We include dummy variables indicating each of the 144 combinations. The (−∞, −25%] × (−∞, −25%] group is the base case.11All of the regressions are stratified by account. Areas with more (less) selling are depicted by a darker shade of red (blue). The median is white.12
  The disposition effect can be observed in Figure2by noting that the right half of the two panels tends to be red, which indicates elevated selling activity, while the left half tends to be blue, which indicates reduced selling activity. Interestingly, the specific pattern of the disposition effect diverges across the two samples—there is a V-shaped selling schedule in the U.S. sample (as documented by Ben-David and Hirshleifer (2012)), whereas the Chinese sample has a reverse V-shape with elevated selling activity near zero.
  The presence of a V-shaped disposition effect in the U.S. data and a reverse V-shape disposition effect in the Chinese data makes it less likely for us to find a PDDE in the U.S. sample and more likely in the Chinese sample. To see why, consider the case in which an investor exhibits a strong V-shaped disposition effect (as in the U.S. data). If her portfolio is at a gain, she is more likely to sell her individual stock gains because they are likely to be extreme gains, that is, she will exhibit a stronger disposition effect when her portfolio is at a gain. This worksagainstthe PDDE. By the same logic, a reverse V-shaped disposition effect worksforthe PDDE. Consistent with this reasoning, including V-shaped controls in TableIIstrengthens the PDDE in the U.S. data and weakens it in the Chinese data. Nevertheless, the PDDE remains strong in both samples.
  As we move down each panel of Figure2(indicating improved portfolio performance), we see that the relative probability of selling losers (the left half of each panel) increases significantly. Conversely, the performance of the portfolio has a much weaker effect on the propensity to sell a winning stock (the right half of each panel). This pattern arises in both the U.S. and Chinese samples, indicating that when we control for unobserved heterogeneity across accounts, the PDDE appears to be driven by the effect of portfolio returns on the propensity to sell losing positions.
  We next examine how the PDDE varies with individual and portfolio characteristics. For each characteristic, we group all of the observations into subsamples and estimate the regression model from column (4) of TableIIon various subsamples. We report all subsample tests in the U.S. (Panel A) and Chinese (Panel B) brokerage samples. Because not all demographic information is available for all investors, the combination of all subsamples is sometimes smaller than the full sample. For investor characteristics, we study age, gender, and trading frequency. Investors are grouped into three age groups: 1 to 40, 41 to 55, and greater than 55. In the United States, these three groups roughly correspond to the first quartile, quartiles 2 to 3, and quartile 4, respectively. In the Chinese sample, these three groups roughly correspond to quintiles 1 to 2, quintiles 3 to 4, and quintile 5, respectively.13Trading frequency is calculated as the unconditional selling propensity of an investor over the full-sample period. We sort all the investors into two trading-frequency groups: those above and below the median. For portfolio characteristics, we test the impact of the holding period on the PDDE. To employ the hazard model described in SectionI.B, we must include all observations from the start of the holding period until a maximum number of days. We report two variations of the maximum holding period, 20 and 250 days.
  Several observations emerge from TableIII. First, we find that the moderating effect of portfolio gains is similar across the different age and gender groups but is slightly larger for high- (low-) trading-frequency investors in the U.S. (Chinese) sample.14Second, the PDDE is larger for longer holding periods in both the U.S. and Chinese samples. Finally, the moderating role of portfolio gains on the disposition effect remains strong across all subsamples, as indicated by the significantly negative interaction coefficients ranging from −0.501 to −0.849 (t-statistics from −9.64 to −41.64) in the U.S. sample and −0.274 to −0.606 (t-statistics from −47.66 to −91.48) in the Chinese sample.
  In an ideal experiment, we would compare identical positions in a particular stock owned by identical investors, with the only difference being the investors’ portfolio performance. By identical positions, we mean that investors own the same stock and purchased the stock on the same day at the same price. By identical investors, we mean investors would make the same decisions when facing a given economic scenario. Because of our large sample, we have identical positions; however, this ideal experiment is not feasible because we do not have identical investors. In our matching analysis, we approximate the ideal experiment by comparing identical positions owned by different investors. Specifically, we stratify by positions built on the same day with the same stock in the regressions. By doing so, we keep the stock and purchase date the same and focus on the portfolio return variation across investors. We also only keep the observations for which there are at least two investors within the same strata. The number of observations represents 52.2% of the full sample. In columns (1) and (2) of TableIV, we find that the coefficient on the interaction term is negative and highly significant whether we stratify by account (−0.831,t-statistic −38.90) or by stock*purchase date (−0.588,t-statistic −34.13).
  With the stratification by positions built on the same day using the same stock, there is not much variation in purchase price within a stratum because we consider purchases of the same stock on the same day. Nevertheless, in a second specification, we further require the exact same purchase price in the stratification. Relative to the first specification, this filter reduces the sample by around half, but the PDDE is similar in magnitude, with interaction coefficients of −0.838 (t-statistic −30.26) and −0.550 (t-statistic −23.30) in columns (3) and (4), respectively. In a third specification, reported in columns (5) and (6), we further exclude positions that were constructed with multiple purchases. We continue to find a strong PDDE.15
  We repeat the above analyses for the Chinese sample.16The coefficient of the interaction term remains negative and highly significant.17The results are broadly similar across the six specifications. The relative magnitude of theGainandGain*Portfolio Gainterms are similar to the baseline estimation in TableII, which suggests that the PDDE is not driven by unobserved stock-level characteristics that are correlated with the portfolio's gain/loss status.
  In the prior section, we compare the selling decision for the same stocks at the same point in time across investors whose portfolios are at a gain and a loss. While this is as close to ideal in the archival setting as possible, we can come even closer to the ideal setting in an experiment in which we can do several things that are not possible in an archival setting: (i) have the same trader on the same day be faced with a portfolio gain and a portfolio loss and observe her differential behavior across these conditions, (ii) inform each trader of the stock data-generating process to minimize differences in information across traders, and (iii) control the display of information to traders.
  We employ a trading game that is similar to Weber and Camerer (1998). We recruited subjects from two pools: undergraduate students from a Chinese university and volunteer workers (“MTurkers”) from “MTurk.” We required subjects to pass a quiz administered prior to the trading game, and we collected trading data from 766 and 2,377 subjects in the Chinese university and MTurk samples, respectively.18There are four fictitious stocks, labeled A, B, C, and D, whose prices evolve randomly. Each trading game lasts 12 rounds. In the first two rounds, subjects simply observe the stock prices and are not able to trade. In Rounds 3 through 12, subjects can use their experimental cash to purchase shares of stocks using a “Buy” button, and if they own shares of a stock, they can sell shares of the stock using a “Sell” button. Each subject plays this 12-round stock trading game a total of four times. Subjects are not allowed to borrow cash or short sell.
  Stock prices evolve each round according to the following two independent processes. First, whether a stock's price will increase or decrease is determined randomly. One of the stocks is randomly chosen to have a 65% chance each round of having its price increasing, while the other three stocks are randomly assigned corresponding probabilities of 55%, 45%, and 35%. The probabilities of increases or decreases are different for each stock and do not change between rounds within a game. Across games, however, the probabilities are randomly reassigned. Second, the magnitude of the price increase or decrease is determined. Prices change by $1, $3, or $5, each with equal probability. The magnitude of the price change is independent of whether the price increases or decreases.
  Each round, subjects are shown a graph of each stock's price evolution up to that round.19Each game, subjects are endowed with 1,000 units of experimental cash that they can use to trade the fictitious stocks, and their compensation depends on the total value of their assets (stock plus experimental cash) at the end of the experiment. Specifically, subjects are paid a 1 RMB ($0.25) show-up fee in the Chinese university (MTurk) sample plus a bonus that is based on their performance during one of the four trading games, which is chosen randomly. The average pay for the subjects was 20.93 RMB and $3.25 in the Chinese and MTurk samples, respectively.
  We begin by estimating our baseline hazard regression model in TableV. In columns (1) to (3), we stratify by subject, and in columns (4) to (6), we also add controls for the V-shaped disposition effect (Ben-David and Hirshleifer (2012)) by including the same return bracket fixed effects from column (5) of TableII. We report the estimates for the Chinese sample in columns (1) and (4), the MTurk sample in columns (2) and (5), and the pooled sample consisting of all subjects in columns (3) and (6).
  The positive coefficients onGainin columns (1) to (3) demonstrate a strong disposition effect in our experimental settings. As in the previous tables, we look for a PDDE by examining the interaction ofGainandPortfolio Gain. In each specification, we find that the coefficient on the interaction is negative and statistically significant, consistent with subjects exhibiting a PDDE. For example, consider the coefficients of 0.699 onGainand −0.420 onGain*Portfolio Gainin column (1). The coefficient onGainindicates a PGR/PLR ratio of 2.01 (= e0.699) when the portfolio is at a loss. When the portfolio is at a gain, PGR/PLR decreases to 1.32 (= e0.699−0.420). In addition, we find that in the most controlled tests with return bracket fixed effects, the interaction coefficient is −0.362 (t-statistic −6.93) in the Chinese experimental sample, −0.421 (t-statistic −10.71) in the MTurk sample, and −0.400 (t-statistic −12.74) in the pooled sample. Together, these results provide evidence that the PDDE holds in this well-controlled environment where we observe the same person on the same day exposed to both a portfolio gain and a portfolio loss and hence can observe her differential tendency to exhibit the disposition effect.
  The PDDE has natural aggregate implications. Although conventional wisdom suggests that the disposition effect is idiosyncratic and specific to each individual investor, the moderating role of portfolio performance can generate aggregate and cyclical effects because the performance of individual portfolios is commonly driven by the overall market. Therefore, one implication of the PDDE is that all investors tend to exhibit the disposition effect around similar points in time, or in other words, there should be comovement in the disposition effect.
  To test this prediction, we calculate the level of the disposition effect across different investor groups quarter by quarter in both the U.S. and Chinese samples. We stratify investors by gender, age, and portfolio size (into 10 equal-sized groups). In the fourth test, we stratify investors randomly into 10 equal-sized groups. For each investor group in each quarter, we estimate the average disposition effect by running equation (1) using investor-stock-day observations.Internet AppendixFigureIA.1presents the results. They-axis corresponds to the value of the disposition effect, and thex-axis to the quarter. We find that investors with different gender, age, portfolio size, and other characteristics comove very closely over time in the level of the disposition effect.
  The PDDE also predicts that the time-series variation of the disposition effect should be related to past market performance: after a bull market, most investors’ portfolios will be at a gain, and therefore the PDDE implies that they should exhibit a weaker disposition effect. In contrast, a bear market should lead to portfolio losses for most investors, and thus a strong disposition effect among investors. In TableIA.X, we examine the relation between the quarterly average disposition effect across all investors and various horizons of past market returns in a univariate regression framework. We find that the quarterly average disposition effect is negatively correlated with past market returns at almost all horizons in both samples.20Moreover, when we compare the correlation across different horizons, we find that the negative correlation between the disposition effect and past market returns peaks at eight quarters in the U.S. sample and at three quarters in the Chinese sample. Interestingly, these horizons closely match investors’ average holding periods in the two samples.21These coefficients are economically sizable. For example, in the United States, a one-standard-deviation (13.1%) change in the cumulative market return over the past eight quarters (Rt−8,t−1) is associated with a 0.083 decrease of the disposition effect, which is 18% of the average of the quarterly disposition effect (0.455). In China, a one-standard-deviation (41.6%) change in Rt−3,t−1(the cumulative market return over the past three quarters) is associated with a 0.112 decrease of the disposition effect, which is 17% of the average of the quarterly disposition effect (0.667).
  Figure3presents the time series of the average disposition effect and past market returns for the U.S. and Chinese samples, with past market returns measured over the past eight (three) quarters for the United States (China). The negative correlation between the disposition effect and past market returns is evident.22We therefore document a systematic and cyclical component in one of the most robust behavioral patterns, the disposition effect.

III. Relationship to Prior Research:   In this section, we examine whether the PDDE is simply a manifestation of prior empirical research.
  We first test whether extreme stocks drive the PDDE. Hartzmark (2015) finds that retail and mutual fund investors are more likely to sell their best- and worst-performing stocks. Intuitively, these extreme stocks grab the investor's attention and, as a result, are sold more often. In our setting, the attention-grabbing hypothesis could predict some of our results, but not others. For example, if an investor has one stock that is a winner and the rest are losers, then this stock is very likely to be sold under both the attention-grabbing hypothesis (it is an extreme stock) and the PDDE (investors are very likely to sell their winners when the portfolio is at a loss). However, if an investor has one stock that is a loser and the rest are winners, this stock is very likely to be sold under the attention-grabbing hypothesis (because it is an extreme stock) but not the PDDE (because losers are nearly as likely to be sold as winners are when the remaining portfolio is at a gain).
  Nevertheless, in TableVIwe evaluate how the rank effect relates to our empirical results. Specifically, in column (1), we add indicator variables for the best-performing and the worst-performing stocks in an investor's portfolio, and in column (2), we add indicator variables for each of the 15 stocks with the best performance and the 15 stocks with the worst performance in an investor's portfolio, following Hartzmark (2015). The interaction coefficient is very similar to the baseline regression in column (4) of TableIIin terms of both statistical significance and economic magnitude for the U.S. (Panel A) and Chinese (Panel B) samples. These results suggest that the rank effect (Hartzmark (2015)) does not explain the PDDE.
  Because Odean (1998) finds that the disposition effect is time-varying due to tax motivations, we consider the possibility that the PDDE could be explained by such considerations. To do so, we conduct our analyses separately within U.S. tax-exempt accounts. Columns (3) and (4) of TableVI, Panel A report the regression results splitting the U.S. sample by tax-exempt and taxable accounts, respectively. Although the PDDE is slightly stronger for taxable accounts, the PDDE is strong among tax-exempt accounts with an interaction coefficient of −0.700 (t-statistic −21.93). Furthermore, tax-loss selling cannot explain the PDDE in the Chinese sample, where capital gains are not taxed. These findings suggest that tax considerations do not explain the PDDE.
  Although Odean (1998) provides evidence that portfolio rebalancing does not explain the disposition effect, it is possible that portfolio rebalancing causes the PDDE. For example, suppose all but one of an investor's stocks is at a loss. The lone stock that is trading at a gain may comprise a disproportionately large percentage of the investor's portfolio due to its gains and the rest of the stocks’ losses. The investor may therefore want to liquidate some of her holdings in the stock that is at a gain in order to rebalance her portfolio. According to this explanation, we should expect investors topartially(but not completely) liquidate their positions in the stock that is at a gain when the rest of the portfolio is at a loss, while we should expect the PDDE to disappear when we restrict attention tocompleteliquidations of stocks.
  To test this prediction, we adjust our specification to use a full liquidation dummy as the dependent variable, thus eliminating any variation from partial sales. In column (5) of Panel A and column (3) of Panel B of TableVI, we report the full liquidation results. For the United States, we see that the interaction coefficient of −0.915 (t-statistic −49.84) is still negative and significant well below the 1% level and nearly offsets the magnitude of theGaincoefficient. For the Chinese sample, the interaction coefficient is −0.597 (t-statistic −115.57) and is about two-thirds of theGaincoefficient. Thus, portfolio rebalancing is an unlikely explanation for the PDDE.
  Another possibility is that the PDDE is explained by heterogeneity of the disposition effect across investors, which may stem from various sources such as investor IQ (Grinblatt, Keloharju, and Linnainmaa (2012)).23Specifically, people who have a strong disposition effect tend to sell winners in their portfolio and keep losers. Therefore, individuals with a strong disposition effect are more likely to have a (paper) portfolio loss compared to individuals with a weak disposition effect, a pattern that might confound our findings.
  To address this concern, we employ two approaches. First, when calculatingPortfolio Gain, instead of restricting attention to the paper gain/loss of currently held positions, we add back previously realized gains/losses in the past one year as if they were not realized.24Under this construction, the variation inPortfolio Gainis driven mainly by the performance of securities in the portfolio, and is unrelated to whether these positions are realized or not (and thus the investor's tendency to exhibit a disposition effect). TableVIIcolumns (1) and (3) report results based onPortfolio Gainconstructed this way.
  Second, we control for heterogeneity in the disposition effect across investors by stratifying the baseline hazard function at the account-gain level in columns (2) and (3) instead of the account level as in column (1). This specification is designed to control for the variation in the disposition effect across investors. That is, for each account, we explicitly allow his or her propensity to sell (the baseline hazard function) to differ across winning and losing positions.25As shown in TableVII, columns (1) to (3), under the alternative definition ofPortfolio Gainand/or the more saturated stratification, the coefficient estimate on the interaction term betweenGainandPortfolio Gainremains significantly negative. Note that since we have subsumed the baseline, account-specific disposition effect under these specifications, the magnitude of the coefficient on the interaction term is not directly comparable across columns, as it reflects a proportional change relative to the baseline case. However, within each column, the magnitude of the coefficient on the interaction term is similar to that onPortfolio Gainin both the U.S. and Chinese samples. This observation suggests that investor heterogeneity in the disposition effect can explain only part of the PDDE.26

IV. Multiple Frames:   The prior section rejects explanations whereby the PDDE is a by-product of various possible mechanisms, such as the rank effect or investor heterogeneity of the disposition effect. In this section, we present evidence that investors have multiple frames that combine to generate the PDDE.27
  Prior research on the disposition effect has establishes narrow framing at the stock level, among stocks within a portfolio (Hartzmark (2015)), and even framing across trades (Frydman, Hartzmark, and Solomon (2018)). Here, we present evidence that investors simultaneously use two separate frames—one at the stock level and one at the portfolio level—when making decisions, resulting in the PDDE. There are several ways that multiple frames could generate the PDDE. For example, investors might engage in hedonic mental accounting (Thaler (1985)), which posits that people frame their decisions in the way that makes them feel best. Specifically, by framing the sale of a losing stock as a liquidation of (part of) the larger portfolio, the investor can mentally account for the liquidation of a loss as a gain, but this is only possible when the portfolio is at a gain. Another possibility is cognitive dissonance, which has been proposed as a mechanism for the disposition effect (Chang, Solomon, and Westerfield (2016)). An investor who simultaneously frames at both the individual stock level and the portfolio level should be especially prone to exhibit the disposition effect when her portfolio is at a loss; in this case, both frames (stock and portfolio) suggest that the investor made bad decisions, and liquidating a loss in this scenario should be particularly difficult to reconcile with one's self-image of a good decision-maker.28Conversely, if the investor's portfolio is at a gain, she can still convince herself she is a good trader by paying attention to the portfolio-level frame, which suggests she is a good trader who makes good decisions.
  To provide direct evidence of an additional frame at the portfolio level, we use the fact that a focal asset's membership in a portfolio will be determined based on how similar the other assets in the portfolio are. Similarity has been extensively documented as a defining characteristic of how individuals create mental accounts (Evers, Imas, and Kang (2022), Goldstone (1994), Nosofsky (1986), Kruschke (1992)). If a portfolio-level frame drives the PDDE, similarity has a direct prediction: assets that are most similar to the focal stock, that is, most likely to be in the same mental account as the focal stock, should have the greatest contribution to the PDDE. With this in mind, we perform two tests based on similarity.
  In TableVIII, we decompose the household return into those stocks in the same account as the focal stock and those stocks held in different accounts. Consistent with the prediction of a portfolio-level frame, the PDDE moderates following dissimilarity. Specifically, column (1) shows that stocks held by the same account as the focal stock generate a PDDE that is 21% (90.0%/74.4% − 1) larger than that of stocks held in the same household but a different account than the focal stock.30Moreover, thep-value testing the difference between β3and β5is less than 1%. When restricting attention to one-adult households, the effect of dissimilarity grows: other holdings in the focal account have a 28% (87.6%/68.5% − 1) larger PDDE compared to that of holdings in different accounts of the same household.31In addition, we reject the null that β3= β5at the 1% level.
  In the prior section, we measure the similarity of stocks across accounts within the same household. Here, we exploit characteristics of the individual assets within a single brokerage account. For example, two U.S. common stocks are more similar to each other than one U.S. common stock and one mutual fund in the same brokerage account.
  In TableIX, we decompose the overall portfolio return and compare capital gains from U.S. common stocks against those from the other four categories one by one. We observe that the moderating effect of the U.S. common stock portfolio (excluding the focal stock) is highly statistically significant across all of the specifications. Furthermore, the moderating effect of capital gains generated by other asset categories is significantly smaller than that of U.S. common stocks, as indicated by the smaller magnitude of β5compared to β3. Economically speaking, the moderating effect of one unit of capital gains generated by other U.S. common stocks in the portfolio is 25% (83.0%/66.5% − 1) larger than that of foreign stocks and 24% (84.9%/68.5% − 1) larger than that of other stock-type securities.37In addition, we reject the null that β3= β5at the 1% level. The moderating effect of other U.S. common stock is three to four times as large as those of mutual funds and options, and the estimations of the latter two are not statistically significant. These findings provide additional evidence of a portfolio-level frame: when assets are similar and therefore more likely to be in the same mental account as the focal stock, those assets generate a stronger PDDE than assets that are dissimilar.
  Taken together, the results suggest that the PDDE is increasing in both asset and account similarity. In particular, the results indicate that investors frame not only at the stock level but also at the portfolio level, with the combination of these two frames generating the PDDE.

V. Conclusion:   The disposition effect is a stock-level phenomenon. But individuals rarely hold single stocks—they often hold portfolios. The purpose of this paper is to answer the question: does the stock-level disposition effect depend on the portfolios they hold? We find a consistent answer among four independent settings: 78,000 U.S. households in a large discount brokerage, 97,000 investors in a Chinese brokerage, 2,300 U.S. participants in an “MTurk” trading game experiment, and 800 experimental participants at a Chinese university. In each of these settings, an investor's disposition effect is large when her portfolio is at a loss and significantly smaller when it is at a gain.
  This PDDE is robust to a variety of controls and does not seem to be a repackaging of previously documented research concerning the disposition effect. However, we find direct evidence that the PDDE is a by-product of investors using an additional, portfolio-level frame when making investment decisions. The PDDE therefore contributes to our understanding of how people frame financial decisions. Originally, researchers assumed that investors use fairly static and fixed frames, but recent research suggests that framing is more fluid and nuanced: sometimes individuals engage in relative evaluation within a portfolio (Hartzmark (2015)), while sometimes they frame across trades (Frydman, Hartzmark, and Solomon (2018)). Our evidence suggests that investors frame at multiple levels—the stock level and the portfolio level—when making trading decisions.
  Editors: Stefan Nagel, Philip Bond, Amit Seru, and Wei Xiong

Supporting Information:   Please note: The publisher is not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting information supplied by the authors. Any queries (other than missing content) should be directed to the corresponding author for the article.
